
                                   A
                               Dictionary
                                   of
                               Men’s Wear


Embracing all the terms (so far as could be gathered) used in the men’s
wear trades expressiv of raw and finisht products and of various stages
and items of production; selling terms; trade and popular slang and cant
terms; and many other things curious, pertinent and impertinent; with an
appendix containing sundry useful tables; the uniforms of “ancient and
honorable” independent military companies of the U. S.; charts of
correct dress, livery, and so forth.

                                   By

                          William Henry Baker

                 Author of “A Dictionary of Engraving”

[Illustration: [Logo]]

    “A good dictionary is truly very interesting reading in spite of
    the man who declared that such an one changed the subject too
    often.”

                                                     —S WILLIAM BECK

                               CLEVELAND

                          WILLIAM HENRY BAKER

                                  1908




           Copyright 1908 By William Henry Baker Cleveland O


               Press of The Britton Printing Co Cleveland




                               Dedication


            Conforming to custom this unconventional book is

                              =Dedicated=

            to those most likely to be benefitted, i. e., to

    The 15000 or so Retail Clothiers
        The 15000 or so Custom Tailors
            The 1200 or so Clothing Manufacturers
                The 5000 or so Woolen and Cotton Mills

    The 22000 or so Retail Shoe Dealers
        The 2300 or so Shoe Manufacturers and Jobbers
            The 19000 or so Retail Hatters
                The 1000 or so Hat and Cap Manufacturers and Jobbers

    The 12000 or so Haberdashers
        The 22000 or so Dry Goods and Department Stores
            And other allied lines of business in this country
                Alike to owners and employes and especially to

                        =“The Advertising Man”=
               Who usually gets all that is coming to him
                              and finally
                      To every man with a library




                              Explanatory


 Some seven years ago the author, then connected with a clothing
manufacturing concern as advertising manager, wrote a compact little
“Clothes Dictionary” which was presented to the trade with the
compliments of the publishers. All definitions were short and to the
point, many were humorous, and all were within a necessarily limited
scope of interest. There had never been anything like it and the book
“caught on” immediately, with the result that the author thereupon went
to work seriously to compile a larger, fuller, more comprehensiv
dictionary along similar lines.

The present book is the result. Six years or more (as time permitted)
have been spent in reading, listening and correspondence for new terms
and new meanings.

Naturally, as all first compilations must inevitably be, the book is,
frankly, lacking many definitions, particularly of terms in popular use
long ago, and doubtless, many of today. Wherefore no claim is made that
the book is complete, but it is believed that it is reasonably so—or
usably so.

In compilation the main purpose has been to make the book comprehensiv
(covering about everything of men’s wear, use and interest) and,
contrary to most dictionaries, encyclopedias and the like, interesting.

Altho the title specifies “men’s wear”, the book broadly covers many
items of women’s wear (as many fabrics, etc., are common to both sexes),
and except that items of strictly women’s wear have been omitted, might
have been entitled “A Dictionary of Apparel”, and should, therefore, be
of quite as much interest to the straight drygoods merchant as to the
modern clothier.

The definitions are not tiresomely long—not any of them—but all are of
sufficient length to cover essentials and are accurate and reliable;
and, altho the dictionary is somewhat encyclopedic, it is not intended
that it shall take the place of any encyclopedia. A feature of its
forerunner that may be appreciated is that many of the less important
and more obvious terms are dismist quite briefly or else freely or
facetiously handled—enough so to induce one to search the pages for
these alone.

Obviously, no hard and fast rules could be set to govern the work. Each
term had to be considered in itself and explained so clearly, without
waste (or skimping) of words, as to be understandable without the aid of
pictures. That there has been no necessity for illustrations and that
the book has been otherwise brightened without them the author considers
somewhat of an achievment.

In a word, it has been the aim of the author to make simply a handy
reference book, “popular” rather than learned, helping one over
transient needs, leaving the wearying technical dissertations to text
books, encyclopedias, etc. If this has been accomplisht, there is great
cause for satisfaction to

                                                     WILLIAM HENRY BAKER

  Cleveland, 1908




                               Memorandum


Please don’t be provoked by the use of “simplified spelling.” It helpt
me cram much more in the compass of this book than could have been done
with the use of some of our superannuated forms. Besides, simplification
is the order of the day, and we might as well get used to it, every one
of us. And, again, only the less jarring and those surest of early
adoption have been used: there’s a concession to conservatism and “the
conventions”.

Neither permit the abbreviation of repetitions of index-words to the
initial letters thereof to confuse you. The eye catches the sense and
simplicity of the scheme quickly enough (the brain should be no less
nimble)—and the eye must not be offended. Besides, this has saved me
more space than “simplified spelling”.

Please notice, further, that this is not a pronouncing dictionary. Most
people in the trade don’t need this feature, thru daily familiarity with
the terms, even tho they may not thoroly understand them—which is
nothing unusual. And so, to keep as many “high-browed” features out of
the way as was possible, and to make this just a handy look-into book
for everyday folks (such a book as I have longed for for my own use)
pronunciation, grammar-classing, and such like devices of the weary
big-books were deemed superfluous and dropt. You will have to go to
them, anyway, on some subjects which this book treats briefly—why tire
you beforehand?—W. H. B.




                         Authorities Consulted


 New International Encyclopedia
 Standard Dictionary
 Cole’s “Encyclopedia of Dry Goods”
 Giles’ “History of Cutting in England”
 Planche’s “History of Costume”
 Mrs. Earle’s “Two Centuries of Costume in America”, “Costume of Colonial
    Days”, etc.
 Mrs. Aria’s “Costume: Fanciful, Historical and Theatrical”
 Mitchell’s “New Standard Coat System”
 Croonborg’s “Supreme System for Men’s Garments”
 Baker’s “Clothes Dictionary”
 Beck’s “Gloves: Their Annals and Associations”
 Boutell’s “Arms and Armour”
 Rimmel’s “The Book of Perfumes”
 Edwards’ “History and Poetry of Finger Rings”
 Hamersly’s “Naval Encyclopedia”
 “Clothes and the Man” by the “Major” of Today
 “The Complete Bachelor” by the author of the “As Seen by Him” papers
 Johnston’s “Clans and Their Tartans”
 Farmer’s “Americanisms, Old and New”

 U. S. War Dept. General Orders No. 169, Aug. 14, 1907, et seq. (Uniform
    Regulations)
 U. S. Navy Dept. Uniform Regulations, 1905
 U. S. Marine Corps Uniform Regulations, 1908
 U. S. Interior Dept. Bureau of Forestry Uniform Regulations
 U. S. Treasury Dept., Circular No. 3, Customs Officer’s Uniforms, Jan.
    3, 1905
 U. S. Treasury Dept. Revised Regulations, Uniforms U. S. Revenue Cutter
    Service, 1900, et seq.
 U. S. State Dept. Report on Silk and Silk Manufactures (Cowdin)
 New York City Police Dept. Manual, 1905
 New York City Fire Dept. Regulations, 1905
 Chicago Police Dept. Uniform Regulations
 Chicago Fire Dept. Uniform Regulations

 “Sartorial Art Journal”
 “American Tailor and Cutter”
 “American Gentleman”
 “Daily Trade Record”
 “Apparel Gazette”
 “The Haberdasher”

 “Clothier and Furnisher”
 “American Hatter”
 “American Silk Trade Journal”
 “Dry Goods Economist”
 “Jeweler’s Circular”
 “Boot and Shoe Recorder”
 “Fibre and Fabric” and other trade journals

Many reference books and other books not specially consulted for this
purpose

Various Government reports not separately credited

Numerous trade catalogs, brochures, etc.




                        Personal Acknowledgments


In recognition of interest and assistance rendered in the matter of
definitions, etc.:

S. S. Paupst, ex-secretary International Custom Cutters’ Association of
America, Cleveland

John A. Carlstrom, ex-president International Custom Cutters’
Association of America, author of “Proportions of the Human Form” and
other works on tailoring, New York

Samuel Dreyer, of Alschuler, Dreyer & Co., clothing manufacturers,
Chicago

Globe Woolen Co., New York

Schnabel Bros., woolens, New York

Regal Shoe Co., East Whitman, Mass.

J. Harry Selz, of Selz, Schwab & Co., shoemakers, Chicago

The Crofut & Knapp Co., hat manufacturers, New York

Spear & Co., cap manufacturers, New York

Members of various independent military companies (in most instances,
the commanding officer) for matter in appendix

While particular and grateful acknowledgment is due to fellow workers in
the clothing and dry goods trades, from whom the argot and lingo of the
trade emanates and becomes, finally, “good English”




                               Dictionary


                                   A

=A 1=—(=1=) of first quality; (=2=) entitled to unlimited credit.

=A la mode=—in style; according to the vogue.

=Aba=—(=1=) a very primitiv garment worn in Northern Africa, consisting
of a square of heavy woolen cloth, folded, with openings for head and
arms and worn after the manner of a coat or tunic; (=2=) a sort of
overcoat of rough brown material open in front, with wide sleeves
terminating at the elbow, worn in Persia. (Also called Abayeh.)

=Abb=—see Wool.

=Abdominal band=—an elastic bandage of knit wool, or other material,
worn over the stomach for general protection in cold weather, or as a
supporter or reducer.

=Abdominal guard=—a sort of suspensory (qv) having a metal or sole
leather protectiv piece with elastic straps, worn by football players,
wrestlers, etc.

=Academic gowns=—the loose, flowing garments worn by students and
professors at certain universities on certain occasions.

=Acid tannage=—a quick process of preparing leather for use, by
immersion in acids instead of the slower salt and bark preparations, and
requiring but 4 to 7 days to put the leather on the market.

=Acid test=—a term generally employed to designate a means of
determining the quality of anything, fabrics, for instance; as testing
the color of indigo with a mixture of acetic and sulfuric acids; for
more exhaustiv explanation see any good encyclopedia. See also
Boiling-out t.

=Acorn=—(=1=) an ornamental end-tag for military hat cords, slings,
etc.; (=2=) an embroidered device representing rank, corps, etc.,
usually placed on caps, collars, etc., of military uniforms.

=Actual measures=—tailoring term meaning no allowances for extra
roominess or any deviation from the usual practise.

=Ad=—easiest spoken and written diminutiv of advertisement, but
senseless in the latter case, advt. being preferable.

=Adhesiv plaster=—see Sticking p.

=Admiral’s uniform=—see Special full dress, Full dress, Dress, Service
dress, Evening dress, Mess dress, Undress; see also variations.

=Adonis=—see Wig.

=Advertisement=—a statement of business fact, customarily with one or
more loop-holes.

=Advertisement writer=—a power in, for and against business in
proportion as he takes himself seriously or jocosely, appreciates or
undervalues his business status, and strives toward certain definit ends
or fritters time away; and yet, good or otherwise, one who seems to take
perpetual personal offense at the suggestions of “the old man”.

=Aesthetic=—(=1=) daintily nice; finical; affecting a love of the
beautiful; (=2=) the beautiful itself.

=After-pressing=—in clothing manufacture, the final pressing-off given
to finisht garments; a careful, painstaking operation during which the
niceties of shape omitted during first pressing (qv) are given to the
garment.

=Agraf=—an ornamental loop, clasp or lock. (=Agraffe.=)

=Aigret=—a tuft of feathers. (=Aigrette.=)

=Aiguilet=—an ornamental festoon or series of loopt gold cords, worn by
general officers of the army, marine corps, etc., with full dress and
special dress uniforms; attacht to right shoulder passing over the
shoulder, around and under the arm and across the right breast,
attaching to one of the top buttons of the coat as prescribed.
(=Aiguilette.=)

=Air-jacket=—a garment, usually of rubber, capable of being inflated and
used as a life preserver.

=Airs=—putting on; making believe; snobbery.

=Alamode=—a plain, soft, glossy silk of colonial days, somewhat like
surah-s, variously used, but especially for linings.

=Alapaca=—corruption of alpaca (qv).

=Alaska=—a cloth-topt rubber overshoe with a large tongue covering the
instep.

=Alaska seal=—the most uniformly good of the various fur seals; trade
term for “finest grade”.

=Alb=—a linen vestment, often richly trimmed, reaching to the ankles,
worn by priests over the cassock and amice, having close sleeves and
girded at the waist.

=Albert=—see Prince A.

=Albert cloth=—general term for reversible all-wool materials, each side
of different colors, and so finisht that no lining is required, used
chiefly for overcoats; better known as “golf cloth”, “plaid back
covert”, etc.

=Alexis=—a bag shaped cap, usually of fur, rounded at the top.

=Alforjas=—a sort of double wallet serving for saddlebags, but more
frequently carried slung across the shoulder; usually of canvas.
(Spanish.)

=Alizarin=—an absolutely fast-color dye substance, formerly obtained
from madder root, but now obtained in large quantities from anthracene,
a coal-tar product. (=Alizarine.=)

=All wool=—literally, fabrics composed entirely of wool—sheep’s wool;
but lately and not too honestly used in connection with fabrics having
an admixture of shoddy or garnetted yarns or having “decorations” of
silk or mercerized cotton, for which conditions the term “commercially
all-wool” has been suggested as less accusiv to sensitiv consciences and
as equally deceptiv to the buyer. Alackaday!

=All-wool-and-a-yard-wide=—a Yankee simile for thoro-going genuineness.

=All-wool-yard-wide-and-an-inch-thick=—familiar or jocular term for good
quality.

=Allapine=—a woolen fabric used for men’s wear in early part of the 18th
century.

=Alligator leather=—the tanned hide of the alligator, characterized by
its peculiar plate-like markings and its enormous durability; used to
some extent for shoe leather but more generally for traveling luggage,
pocket books, etc.

=Allonge=—see Wig.

=Alpaca=—(=1=) the wooly hair of a South American animal of the camel
family, first manufactured into fabrics by Sir Titus Salt, a worsted
spinner at Liverpool; (=2=) a thin, glistening, plain-woven, double-fold
fabric, usually with a fine cotton or linen warp, used for summer coats,
linings, etc.

=Alpargatas=—low, thick-soled sandals tied around the ankles with gay
ribbons, worn by Castalian peasants. Also called espardènas.

=Alpine hat=—see Fedora.

=Alteration hand=—in tailoring, a bushelman; one who alters garments to
make them agree with the pattern or to better fit the customer.

=Alterations=—(=1=) the sine qua non of a “perfect fit”, and eke items
of expense to the tailor; (=2=) makeshifts of the impecunious to force
garments into presentability for another season.

=Amana goods=—general term for flannels, calicos, jeans, stocking yarns,
etc., manufactured by the Amana Community or Society of True
Inspiration, a religious order centering principally at (and in other
towns about) Amana, Tabor Co., Iowa. Characteristics of these goods are
stoutness, simplicity and durability.

=Amber=—a fossilized resin of yellowish color, used for jewelry, cigar
holders, mouthpieces, etc.

=Ambergris=—a substance generated by the spermaceti whale and found
floating on the sea or washt ashore, used in the blending of certain
perfumes and valued for an ethereal fragrance imparted thereto.

=American shoulders=—“Epauls Americaine”, an appellation given to wadded
shoulders in France.

=Americans=—trade term for cloths produced by any of the many mills
comprising the great concern known as the American Woolen Company.

=Amice=—an embroidered ecclesiastical collar of fine white linen attacht
to a hood.

=Ammunition bag=—a b. or pouch of waterproof canvas or duck, carried
suspended by a strap from the shoulders; also used as lunch b., for
small luggage, etc.

=Ammunition belt=—see Cartridge b.

=Amulet=—a charm, often of precious metals and gems, worn around the
neck as a preventiv of ills, enchantments, accidents, etc.

=Anderson’s=—trade diminutiv for the fine ginghams manufactured by David
& John Anderson, Glasgow, Scotland.

=Anglesea=—trade name for a light, thinnish curl given to felt hat
brims; compare D’Orsay.

=Anglican cassock=—differing from Latin c. in that it is double-breasted
without buttons, the cincture or girdle being knotted behind the hip.

=Angola=—a thick, soft wooly overcoating.

=Angora=—(=1=) the hair or wool of the Angora goat of Asia Minor, from
which is woven the mohair fabrics of commerce. A. wool is classified as
combing, carding and coarse, and again subdivided into about ten other
grades. See Wool; (=2=) also, loosely, any fabric woven of A. wool.

=Anilin dye=—any dye stuff derived from coal tar; such dyes are
permanent on silk and wool, but are fugitiv on fabrics of vegetable
fiber. (=Aniline.=) See Alizarin dye.

=Ankle boot=—(=1=) a heavy rubber shoe reaching to the ankle for wear
over (lumbermen’s) heavy wool socks; (=2=) an old name for shoes.

=Ankle length=—trade term for undergarments reaching to the ankles.

=Ankle support=—a device of leather, metal or fiber for the support of
weak ankles, worn either inside or outside the stocking, but inside the
shoe, by athletes, children and people with weak ankles.

=Annapolis uniform=—see Cadet u.

=Anthropometry=—man-measurement; an essential tailoring study.

=Apple-pie-order=—in excellent condition; fine shape; neat and trim.

=Apprentice=—one who serves under another to learn a trade, art or
profession, especially when indentured; usually a minor.

=Apron=—(=1=) a sort of loose overgarment, variously made, of fabric,
leather, etc., worn to protect one’s clothes while at work; (=2=) the
curtain or inside waist lining of trousers; (=3=) a sort of light
drapery worn in hot countries around a hat or cap, covering the neck
(see Havelock); (=4=) part of the regalia of certain secret societies;
(=5=) a livery lap robe.

=Apron checks=—gingham woven in small, plain square checks.

=Apron overalls=—a style of o. made with a shield or apron covering
breast of wearer.

=Apron supporter=—a sort of belt or adjustable strap for holding aprons
(waiters, et al.) in place without slipping.

=Arch support=—a mechanical device made of metal or leather, or both,
worn inside the shoe, immediately under the arch of the foot and
conforming to the shape of the foot at this point, used as a support to
prevent the falling of the arch or support a flat foot.

=Arctics=—warm-lined waterproof overshoes, usually with rubber soles and
cloth tops, fastening with one or more buckles.

=Arkansaw toothpick=—see Bowie knife.

=Arm band=—an elastic band similar to a woman’s round garter, worn to
hold up shirt sleeves.

=Arm-head=—see Shoulder h.

=Arm-hole=—the opening in a coat or shirt to which the sleeve is joined;
the arm opening in a sleeveless waistcoat; the scye (qv).

=Arm-pit=—the axilla or cavity under the arm; compare Arm-hole and Scye.

=Arm-scye=—see Scye.

=Armenian cloak=—a fashionable overgarment of 1851, composed of one
piece of cloth (except for the sewed-on wide turnover collar) and with
no seams except the underarm seam of sleeve and the underarm body-join,
the collar and front edges trimmed with velvet or wide braid, and the
garment fastened at the neck with cord and tassels.

=Armistice cloth=—an effect in color combining; a sort of worsted cloth,
variant of Queen’s mourning c. and of Coronation c., exhibiting Boer
orange, royal blue and black with occasionally white or red; appeared
about the time of conclusion of Boer war and named in commemoration
thereof.

=Armlet=—(=1=) an ornamental band of classic times; (=2=) an elastic
used for holding up shirt sleeves; (=3=) a piece of ancient armor.

=Armor=—defensiv paraphernalia worn by the knights and soldiery of
medieval times and now manufactured for the benefit of those
manufacturing an ancestry. English a. since the Norman conquest may be
divided into 4 great groups: (=1=) mail a., worn until 1300; (=2=) mixt
mail and plate a., worn from say 1301 to say 1410; (=3=) plate a., worn
from about 1410 to almost 1600; (=4=) half a. (partial—these were the
days they were learning to do without it) worn until say 1700. If
interested further consult encyclopedia or other authoritativ work on
the subject.

=Armozine=—a strong corded silk once used for waistcoats.

=Armure=—any cloth woven in miniature imitation of feudal metal
armor-plates, heraldic devices, diamonds, birdseye and seeded effects;
specifically (1) a twilled or cross-twilled fabric of silk or wool; (2)
a manner of setting up loom harnesses to produce the wanted weave. The
principal “armures” are (a) taffeta or 2 harness, forming a single
interlacement; (b) serge or 3 harness; (c) twill or Batavia, 4 harness;
and (d) satteen, 5 or more harnesses.

=Army and navy brushes=—better known as military b. (qv).

=Army belt=—a waist b. of stuft russet leather or pigskin, with
detachable slings of same, worn by all officers (except chaplains) under
the dress coat and overcoat and outside the service coat. In the field,
cross belts over the shoulders for carrying saber and pistol are
authorized. A b. of black webbing with detachable slings of stuft russet
leather or pigskin may be worn under the dress coat. Full dress slings
worn with full dress uniform, and russet or pigskin with all others.

=Army brogan=—see Brogan.

=Army cap=—see Dress c., Service c., White c., Full dress c.

=Army facings=—see Officers’ f.

=Army hat=—see Service h.

=Army helmet=—for officers and enlisted men, of white and khaki-colored
materials; conforming to pattern in quartermaster’s dept.; worn in lieu
of service cap with the service uniform on garrison duty and as
otherwise prescribed; recently discontinued.

=Army leggings=—for officers, of stuft russet leather of strapputtee
pattern; for enlisted men, of cotton, duck or canvas, laced, of the
color of the service uniform.

=Army stripes=—see Trousers s.

=Army officers’ cape=—a circular c. of dark blue cloth reaching to the
tips of the fingers, with a rolling collar of black velvet and closing
at the throat with a long loop. Lined as follows: general officers and
officers of staff corps and departments, dark blue; infantry officers,
light blue; artillery officers, scarlet; cavalry officers, yellow. May
be worn by all officers when not on duty with troops under arms.

=Army overcoat=—for officers: a double-breasted ulster of olive-drab
woolen material, closing with 5 large horn buttons; deep standing
collar; a large vertical pocket, opening thru lining, with outer flap,
on each side; deep center vent; coat to reach 8 to 10 inches below knee,
with back belt let into side seams, buttoning behind; a detachable hood
of same material; bands of black braid on sleeves and other insignia
according to rank. For enlisted men: of olive-drab woolen material, the
general design and cut same as officers’ overcoats, bronze buttons.

=Army shoes=—for enlisted men: of black calfskin, blucher style for
dress; of stufft russet grain calf, for marching; of russet leather,
blucher style, for garrison; of brown cotton duck for barracks wear. For
officers, high shoes of black calf, black enamel or black patent leather
or of stuft russet leather.

=Army trunk=—any t. designed for army (or navy) officers’ use, commonly
provided with trays and compartments for saber, hats, shoes, in addition
to the usual provisions for suits of clothes, underwear, etc.

=Army uniforms=—see Full dress, Dress u., Service u., Fatigue u., et
var; also general orders No. 169, August 14, 1907, et seq.

=Arrowhead=—same as Crowsfoot (qv).

=Art fiber silk=—proprietary term for artificial or wood s. (also called
art s.), and articles made therefrom. See Artificial s.

=Art silk=—see Artificial s.

=Articles=—cant for a suit of clothes.

=Artificial silk=—a lustrous textil fabric, largely used for neckwear,
chemically produced from wood cellulose, and then dyed, spun, and woven
or knit; is easily injured by dampness or wet; its strength is said to
be about 68% of that of pure s. and of about the same elasticity. Also
called variously Art s., Textil(e) s., Wool s., etc.

=Artillery pocket=—the deadly hip p.

=Artillery uniform=—see Full dress, Dress u., Service u., Fatigue u., et
var.

=As had=—as before; up to quality of previous purchases.

=As is=—as it stands; not perfect; not guaranteed; without liability for
defects.

=Asbestos=—an excellent material for grave clothes.

=Ascot=—a cravat or neck dressing to be tied as a puff, once-over,
waterfall, etc.

=Assabet=—a well-known American make of flannel (qv).

=Astrakan=—a woolen or silk material with a long and closely curled pile
in imitation of the fur of that name. See below.

=Astrakhan fur=—the pelts of young lambs from the country of that name,
usually black and very curly; used for making collars, muffs, coats,
etc.

=Atef crown=—a high, conical headpiece or diadem of mythological
symbolism; also worn by certain kings on ceremonial occasions.

=Athletic pants=—loose cotton knee trousers or trunks, with a fly or
with elastic waistband.

=Athletic shirt=—a loose cotton s., cut low in the neck and either with
deep open armholes or with short loose shoulder sleeves.

=Athletic underwear=—general name for light, loose undergarments;
drawers usually cut knee length; shirts usually low neck and sleeveless,
sometimes with deep armholes.

=Atlas=—a light, half-silk fabric glost on one side, chiefly used for
linings.

=Attar of roses=—the fragrant, volatil, essential oil extracted from the
petals of roses; used pure and as a base for many other perfumes.

=Attleborough=—trade term meaning “cheap jewelry”, which is largely made
in Attleborough, Mass. See Brummagem.

=Au rigueur=—full ceremonious dress.

=Auction sale=—a merchandising fake, generally; if peripatetic an
invariable fraud.

=Aune=—the old French unit of cloth measure (1¼ yards), now superseded
by the metric system.

=Australian wool=—a term used commonly in the sense of exceptional
quality or excellence and to distinguish Australian w. from that
produced elsewhere. See Wool.

=Automatics=—trade term for worsted fabrics woven on automatic looms, in
contradistinction to those requiring much personal attendance.

=Automobile cap=—a rain, dust and windproof c. for motor wear, with and
without goggles.

=Automobile cape=—a leather or cloth c. for wear in automobiling.

=Automobile coat=—any c., especially an overcoat, designed for
automobile wear, of style varying according to taste or requirements,
but usually notable for amplitude of skirt, roominess, and the manner in
which it is made to protect against wind, rain, cold, dust, etc.

=Autumn weight=—see Fall w.


                                   B

=Baboosh=—a sort of slipper made with sole and vamp only, worn chiefly
in Oriental countries.

=Baby flannel=—a light-weight all-wool fabric, usually plain woven,
carefully finisht and bleacht white.

=Baby lamb=—see Persian l. and Broadtail.

=Bachelor’s button=—(1) a trouser’s b. with a self-clamping or riveting
shank; (2) a flower of the centaurea or ranunculus family, worn in
lapels by some exquisites.

=Bachelor’s gown=—a loose, flowing g. of black stuff, with hood and long
pointed sleeves, having facings of colored material indicativ of the
branch of learning.

=Back=—(1) of a garment, the rear part; (2) of a fabric, the underside.
See Back part.

=Back-and-fore stitch=—a combination of back s. and running s., made by
making a regular back s., but before withdrawing needle, letting it go
thru again and repeat; usually employed when speed is desired, but
greater strength needed than is afforded by regular running s. (qv).

=Back fold=—the plaits in the back of a frock or skirted coat.

=Back order=—a memorandum of goods due purchaser on original order,
which was shipt in an incomplete state, owing to shortage of some of the
items, which are placed on “back order”, to go forward as soon as
received.

=Back part=—broadly, the behind part or rear of any garment; in coat
making that part which joins the sidebody, as in a frock coat, or the
forepart, as in a sack coat.

=Back pockets=—hip p., which garrisoned, are infinit sources of shock
and trouble.

=Back shop=—a tailor’s workshop, on the premises.

=Back stitch=—considered the most important s. a tailor employs, made by
taking a long s. forward and another of half the length back; a very
strong and flexible s., used for sewing waist seams, inseams, sleeves,
etc.

=Back strap=—see Heel s.

=Backing=—(1) the under-web of double or faced cloth; (2) the refuse
from wool or flax dressing.

=Backt cloth=—technically, a single fabric with a series of threads so
woven on the under surface as to form almost a distinct layer of c., yet
in close combination with the face fabric, the object being a gain in
weight or bulk, or the appearance of it; one series of warp and weft
only is employed. Usually worsteds and cheap overcoatings. Loosely
called Double c., French back, etc. (qv). Compare Thru-and-thru.
(=Backed c.=)

=Badge=—a mark, token or decoration.

=Badger=—an animal of the melinae sub-family, the hide of which is used
for robes, etc., the hair for shaving brushes and other brushes.

=Badger whiskers=—a form of facial artistry, prescribed by Hon. Geo. E.
Badger, Secretary of the Navy, in 1841, to the effect that no part of a
sailor’s beard should be worn long except the whiskers, and that they
should not descend more than an inch below the ears and then in a line
with the mouth.

=Bag-and-baggage=—all one’s movable Lares and Penates.

=Bag breeches=—knickerbockers (qv) are sometimes so called—tho
incorrectly.

=Bag gloves=—see Punching b. g.

=Bag tag=—a t. usually of leather and variously made, for attaching to
hand luggage, and which contains the owner’s name, address, etc.

=Bag wig=—a w. with a bag to hold the back hair.

=Baggage=—trunks, valises, bundles, and the like, taken on a journey and
containing one’s wardrobe, toilet conveniences, etc.; luggage.

=Baggage examiners’ uniform=—see Custom’s officers’ u.

=Bagged=—tailoring term indicating that the edges of a coat were sewed
by machine all around from the wrong side and then turned; also that the
lining of a coat was first fitted to the garment in its several parts,
then sewed up, after which it and the coat were sewed together inside
out, except at the neck, much like a turn-sole shoe, and turned and
presst, the neck being finisht by hand.

=Bagged=—distended, bulged, misshapen, thru wear or neglect, as knees of
trousers in need of pressing.

=Bags=—slang for trousers.

=Baize=—a plain-worn, plain colored, slightly napt woolen fabric,
formerly used for clothing, but now more coarsely woven and used for
draperies, etc.

=Balance=—the hang or drape of a coat. Compare Not balanced.

=Balance measure=—tailoring term for a m. taken from the collar seam at
back center, running in front of arm to back center at natural waist
point. Not much in use at present.

=Balbriggan=—trade term for unbleacht cotton underwear and hosiery; from
Balbriggan, Ireland, where first made.

=Baldrick=—a sash or belt, often richly ornamented, usually worn over
the shoulder and diagonally across the breast, to support sword, bugle,
powder flasks, etc.

=Baldy=—a colloquial vulgarism for a baldheaded man.

=Bale=—a bundle or package.

=Baleine=—whalebone.

=Ball=—the widest part of the foot, or of a shoe, or of the sole
thereof; the tread.

=Ballet shirt=—a plainly made, loose white cotton blouse, susceptible of
being worn with almost any costume; often made with a wide, turned down
collar; a distinctiv garment for members of the chorus, male and female;
also called “chorus shirt”.

=Balling=—top making; one of the processes of manufacturing worsted
yarn. See Tops.

=Balmoral=—(1) a striped woolen stuff, heavy and durable; (2) a kind of
Scotch cap; (3) a shoe lacing in front. See =Laced shoe=.

=Bals=—trade diminutiv for balmoral, or laced shoe.

=Bamboo=—a kind of reed-wood, hollow, and very light, but elastic and
tough; used for walking sticks, baskets, etc.

=Band=—a trimming or finishing part of a garment or other article of
dress, usually a strip of material sewed into place.

=Band bow=—a readymade bow tie with a band passing around the collar and
fastening at some point, usually at the back.

=Band box=—a light paper or wooden b., round, square or oval, used for
carrying or storing hats, millinery, etc.; so called because used for
bands and ruffs in 17th century.

=Band teck=—a readymade neck scarf for wear with lay-down collar. See
Band bow and Teck.

=Band top=—the welted wrist finish of a glove.

=Band uniforms=—(=army=) the general uniforms of their regiments or
corps, with allowable ornaments to the dress and full dress uniforms of
officers; black lynx-skin shakos with plume and tassel of color of corps
or arm of service, with leather chinstraps with brass scales and
side-buttons, for drum-majors on full dress occasions; those for cavalry
drum-majors being smaller than those for other arms; batons as per
pattern, with silk cords and tassels of color of corps or arms of
service for dismounted drum-majors only; those with mounted bands
carrying sabers; belts, chevrons, stripes, etc., as per regulations.

=Bandage=—a temporary article of attire locally bestowed; a surgical
dressing.

=Bandana=—a large, bright-colored handkerchief with spots or figures
kept free from dye by local pressure in the dying process, or as in
later use freed by chemical extraction or bleaching. Originally a
Hindustani mode of dyeing in which hard knots were tied in the cloth
before dipping. When opened the fabric has a speckled appearance, the
dye having left the tied parts free from color. See Extracted and Batik.

=Bandboxy=—neat, smart, newish.

=Banded turban=—a plain-sided, plain-topt cap with a
pull-down-and-roll-up band.

=Banding=—in shirt collar making the process of sewing the b., if there
is one, to the collar proper; also applied to sewing of cuffs.

=Bandmaster’s uniform=—(=navy=) see Dress, Undress, Working dress, and
variations.

=Bands=—(1) the collars or ruffs of 16th and 17th centuries; (2) the
linen strips or tabs pendant from the front of a clerical or academical
collar or neckdressing.

=Bandsmen’s full dress coat=—(=navy=) see Full dress c.

=Bandsmen’s helmet=—(=navy=) black, the same as for enlisted men of the
marine corps, including spike, spike base and chin strap, with device of
the service, etc.

=Bandsmen’s trousers=—(=navy=) for bandmaster, of sky-blue cloth, cut
with medium spring, side pockets, with a welted edge stripe of scarlet
cloth 1 in. wide down the outer seams; for musicians, the same except
with a 3–16 in. welt of scarlet cloth.

=Bandsmen’s uniform=—(=navy=) see Dress, Undress, Working dress;
(=marine corps=) Special full dress, Full dress, Undress; (=army=) Full
dress, Dress u., White u., Service u., Fatigue u. Also variants.

=Bang up=—first-rate.

=Bangs=—a fringy feminin way of dressing the front hair; Ann Arbor boys
once astonisht a respectable nation by their adoption. See also
portraits of William Walter Phelps and Elihu Root.

=Banian=—a sailor’s colored frock. Probably a similar garment as
described in banyan (qv).

=Bankrupt=—can’t pay.

=Bannockburn=—a sort of tweed (qv) from a town of that name near
Glasgow, Scotland; also variously applied to fancy suitings made
elsewhere in England and America.

=Banyan=—an oriental style of neglige gown, not unlike a kimono, much
affected in colonial days, often very elaborate in material, color and
trimmings; a dressing gown.

=Baptismal gown=—a plain g. without collar and with wideopen flowing
sleeves, of black serge or cord or waterproof stuff.

=Baptismal pants=—(ought to be called b. trousers) a variety of rubber
wading p., (ought to be called w. trousers) with attacht boots, worn
just once by those whose faith is in baptism by immersion—but of course
oftener by the officiating clerygyman.

=Baptismal sleeves=—of gossamer rubber, for covering and protecting the
coat sleeves under the gown.

=Bar end=—trade term for buttonholes finished with a straight tack or
bar at right angles to the opening; most used in the collar trade. See
below.

=Bar tack=—an ornamental strengthening finish at the ends of pockets,
vents, etc. See B. t. stitch and Crowsfoot.

=Bar tack stitch=—in staying the ends of pockets, several long
perpendicular stitches are first taken at the ends to be protected; then
these are tackt down to the cloth at intervals by crosswise stitches and
finally smoothly covered on themselves, by closely laid over-and-under
stitches of the thread.

=Barathea=—general name for armure weave silk.

=Barber=—a human talking machine.

=Barber’s coat=—a short jacket worn by barbers while at work; usually of
white duck (tho sometimes black venetian or alpaca), commonly
single-breasted with gilt buttons.

=Bareface finish=—weaving term indicating that the nap is sheared off
completely. Compare dress faced, Scotch f., Velvet f.

=Barefoot sandals=—a name sometimes given to sole leather s. worn by
small children, sometimes with stockings, but more properly with
barefeet, heelless, fastened with straps and usually having cut-out
designs in front. Also called scrappers.

=Bargain=—“at a good bargain pause awhile”, especially in these latter
days.

=Bark=—see Tanbark.

=Barker=—a gent who stands outside of cheap clothing shops of the Baxter
street type to “persuade” (any way) passers-by to enter and purchase; a
type of worker higher toned merchants are endeavoring to suppress.

=Barlow=—the single-bladed jacknife we thought the world of when we were
kids.

=Barndoor trousers=—vernacular for front falls (qv).

=Baroque pearl=—an irregular shaped fresh water p.

=Barrackan=—in Mediterranean countries a camels-hair cloth for men’s
wear; in England a sort of moleskin; same as barragon (qv).

=Barracks shoes=—(=army=) for enlisted men; of brown cotton duck; worn
in barracks only.

=Barragon=—a light-weight corded woolen stuff (of about 1750) originally
of camels-hair. Probably same as barrackan (qv).

=Barrel=—the knot of a folded four-in-hand, teck or similar scarf.

=Barrel top=—trade term for trunks made with a convext top.

=Barring=—a method of re-enforcing or strengthening certain points in
the upper of a shoe by peculiar stitches inserted where desired by a b.
or stitching machine, the b. or re-enforcing stitches being located
mostly at the point in the upper where the vamp and top and tongue come
together at the so-called throat point of the shoe. The corners of a
blucher shoe where they lap onto the vamp are re-enforced by extra
stitching called b.; also Oxford shoes at the top of the heel seam are
usually re-enforced either by this method or an extra piece of leather.

=Barrow coat=—a garment made for us before we are born—a good example of
readymade guess-fits; specifically a square or oblong piece of flannel,
gathered at one end into a band, wrapped around an infant’s body below
the arms, the loose hanging part being turned up around the feet; also
called Pinning blanket.

=B’ar’s grease=—once a popular hair slickener.

=Barvell=—a coarse leather apron used by workmen and fishermen; name
practically obsolete.

=Baseball=—a periodical deterrent of attention to business; a summer
complaint afflicting the boss quite as seriously as the office boy, who
is especially subject to all influences of this sort.

=Baseball gloves=—stout g. of various shapes worn by baseball players.

=Baseball mask=—a sort of birdcage worn by catchers and umpires as a
protector of pulchritude.

=Baseball shoes=—soft leather or canvas s., three-quarters high, laced
well down to the toes, with low heels and with metal plates, spikes or
cleats on soles and heels for safety and surety in running.

=Baseman’s mitt=—a sort of cushioned leather mitten used in playing
baseball—of course!

=Basillard=—an old term for a poniard.

=Basket cloth=—c. woven in imitation of interlaced or plaited basket or
straw work; an effect produced solely by disposition of warp and weft
threads and not by colors of the yarn. See B. weave.

=Basket hilt=—a wide guard or cover continued up the hilt of a cutlas,
protecting nearly the whole hand from injury.

=Basket weave=—a plain w. in which two or more threads in both the
direction of warp and of filling are found together, giving a coarser
appearance of weave as if squared or plaited.

=Bastard=—any fabric woven in imitation of better and more expensiv
goods.

=Baste=—to sew loosely together or fasten temporarily in place with long
irregular stitches.

=Basting puller=—in clothing manufacture a workman (either gender) who
does nothing but draw out threads.

=Basting stitches=—temporary s. holding two or more pieces of material
together until the work is done. Usually a long running stitch or a
slight side stitch.

=Bastings=—left in a garment are said by the drivelly facetious to mean
that you have not paid the maker’s bill.

=Bat (to)=—a process of cleansing soiled linen by beating, and not by
rubbing as is usual with most laundresses.

=Bat bag=—a b. of canvas, leather or both, for carrying baseball bats.

=Batavia=—see Armure.

=Bath coating=—“like Mr. Brummel wears”; term not now in use and the
particular goods not identified.

=Bath mat=—a rug of heavy cotton terry or rag carpeting for the bather
to stand on after emerging from tub.

=Bath mitten=—a m. of knitted wool, terry toweling, etc., for bathing
purposes.

=Bath robe=—a long gown for wear between bath-room and dressing room,
also for bed-room lounging.

=Bath sheet=—an extra large bath towel used as a towel or as a
substitute for the bath robe.

=Bath slipper=—a s. with sole and vamp, but no counter or heel, the vamp
usually of material used for bath robes; a mule.

=Bath strap=—see Rubbing s.

=Bath towel=—a large t. of cotton or linen terry.

=Bathing belt=—a b. of canvas or other suitable material with which
modestly to sustain one’s bathing trunks.

=Bathing suit=—knee tights and a long sleeveless shirt; also a similar
one-piece garment; usually made of knitted cotton or worsted.

=Bathing trunks=—a tight-fitting knitted garment covering the person
from the waist to the upper part of the thighs.

=Batik=—name given to results in dyeing by which the pattern or design
is in black or of different color or colors than the ground color,
achieved in many ways, as (1) mordanting, (2) bleaching, (3) acid
treatment, (4) tying and drying, (5) wax overlays, etc. Name properly
designates only the primitiv East Indian processes. See Bandana,
Crossdye, Extracted, Resist dye, etc.

=Bating=—a process in the preparation of leather following upon that of
liming, for the purposes of reducing swellings or thickenings and for
cleansing of grease or other impurities, dog’s dung and warm water being
the agents mostly employed.

=Batiste=—a fine linen or cotton cloth similar to lawn or cambric.

=Batten=—in weaving the motion of pushing one weft thread up close to
that one previously thrown in.

=Batting=—cotton or wool prepared in sheets for quilting or interlining.
See Padding.

=Batts=—laced low shoes; term obsolete.

=Batwing=—a shaped tie for wear with high-banded folded collars.

=Baudekin=—a silk and gold fabric of the middle ages.

=Baum wolle=—German for “vegetable wool” or, in plain English, cotton.
Fonetically used by irreverent salesmen in cheap clothing establishments
and by knowing customers in the sense of “bum wool”.

=Baxter street=—a street in New York city once famous for its small
Hebrew clothing shops and their rather peremptory ways of inducing
customers to step inside and purchase; a synonym for cheap clothing and
disreputable methods.

=Bay rum=—an aromatic toilet water on which the barber makes a corking
profit.

=Bayadere=—weaving term for stripes running across the fabric from side
to side.

=Beach robe=—a sort of dressing gown for wear over bathing clothes,
constructed of light material, usually like an ulster overcoat in style.

=Beachman=—a person on the coast of Africa who acts as interpreter to
shipmasters and assists them in conducting trade.

=Beading=—see Heel seat wheeling; also Wheeling.

=Beam=—a horizontal cylindrical bar, in a loom, upon which warp or woven
goods are wound.

=Bear=—a large plantigrade ursoid carnivore, especially of the genus
Ursus, the pelts of which are used for driving coats, coat linings,
gloves, carriage robes, etc.

=Beard=—stubble, toughest in illness.

=Beards=—envied by men who can’t grow them; variously known as Vandyke
b., English b., hammer b., cathedral b., mouse eaten b., pique-divant
b., Methodist b., spike b., parted b.—but you’d better read Planche,
Earle, et al., or see a barber.

=Bearing cloth=—a christening robe, usually richly embroidered.

=Bear’s grease=—hair-slobber stuff.

=Bearskin=—(1) the fur headdress of the footguards of the British army;
(2) vernacular for the tall fur cap or shako worn by drum-majors for
feminin envy and conquest; (3) a shaggy woolen stuff for outer wear; (4)
a coat or robe made of the skin of a bear.

=Beating the booby=—(nautical) swinging the arms from side to side to
create a warmth by accelerating the circulation of the blood.

=Beatty cape=—a measuring and drafting device for tailors (from name of
inventor). See Measuring c.

=Beau=—a man devoted to the care and adornment of his person and to
matters of social etiquet; a dandy, a fop, a lady’s man.

=Beau monde=—the fashionable world.

=Beau peruke=—see Wig.

=Beauty sleep=—such sleep as one can get before midnight.

=Beaver=—a heavy, double-woven, smooth-faced woolen overcoating, woven
with two sets of wefts, face and back, the former of the finer wool,
fulled, napt and sheared to a high degree, producing a smooth, close,
dense surface; the back usually finisht with a loose, soft nap. The
range of quality from finest to coarsest is very great. In general,
resembling Kersey, tho less firm.

=Beaver=—a sort of flat-lying heavy silk plush used for a chapeaux and
formerly for those famous plug hats of “the good old days”.

=Beaver=—nowadays slang for any tall hat of silk or felt; less than 100
years ago a tall hat of heavy napt plush; originally any hat made of
beaver fur.

=Beaver=—a movable piece of armor, attacht to the helmet, covering the
lower part of the face.

=Beaver=—a casteroid rodent whose pelt is largely used in the
manufacture of fur garments, hats, etc.

=Beaverteen=—a heavy twilled solid color cotton fabric, a sort of
fustian, napt on the back, shorn after being dyed; used for hunting
garments.

=Bed canopy=—a drapery of mosquito netting.

=Bed pocket=—an ornamental bag or pouch for watch, handkerchief, dope,
etc., hung at the head of the bed; not in widespread use.

=Bed slippers=—ungainly things of very warm material worn by persons of
poor circulation.

=Bed socks=—for cold feet.

=Bedeck=—to cover with ornaments or adorn—oh, vanity!

=Bedford cord=—a worsted fabric with heavy rounded ribs or cords running
in the direction of the warp; a favorit cloth for riding trousers,
livery wear, etc.

=Beetling=—a mechanical process for soft-finishing certain kinds of
cotton and linen goods.

=Beige=—(1) the color of undyed, unbleacht wool; (2) a light-weight,
plain fabric of such wool; also called debeige.

=Bell=—see Flare, also Spring.

=Bell=—the side of a cap, especially of uniform style.

=Bell bottoms=—vernacular for sailor’s wide-mouthed trousers.

=Bell-mouth=—flared at the opening, as sailor’s trousers, bell-sleeves,
etc.

=Belled=—flared.

=Belled-skirt=—a flaring s.

=Bellows pocket=—an outside or patch p. made with an extension strip or
bellows-fold around sides and bottom, making such p. larger and more
capacious than the flat patch p., and especially adapted to shooting or
hunting jackets. A variety of bellows p. is made by means of an open box
plait in the center thereof, permitting stuffing.

=Bellows suit case=—a s. c. (qv) having one or both sides bellowed by
means of extendible folds for extra capacity.

=Bellows tongue=—a t. fastened to both sides of the opening in a laced
shoe and not left free as ordinary tongues.

=Belly button=—not an article of apparel.

=Belly doublet=—a d. covering the belly.

=Bellyband=—a band of woolen or silk material worn by babies.

=Belongings=—synonym for “property”, in which sense it is a survival of
old English usage; often employed as euphemism for “trousers” by the
prudishly inclined.

=Belt=—(1) a band or girdle of leather or other material, worn to
sustain trousers in place without the aid of suspenders; (2) a b. worn
with uniforms in army, navy, police and fire departments, and by various
societies, for dress, for carrying sword, club, etc.; (3) a sash or
band, more or less ornate, worn by pugilists to awe each other and mark
the line between fair and unfair punches. See Championship b.

=Belt loops=—l. or straps sewn at intervals around the waist band of
trousers, for the insertion and holding in place of a belt, the object
being to sustain the trousers without the use of suspenders.

=Bench=—(=1=) a table that journeymen tailors squat upon while working;
(=2=) a small table or stand holding a shoemaker’s tools.

=Bench-made=—a term used to describe “bespoken”, as the English call it,
or custom handmade shoes. Before the advent of machinery, when shoes
were all made by hand, the workmen sat along on benches and each workman
made a complete shoe, performing all the operations. They were,
therefore, called b-m. and the term today is used to designate handmade
or custom-made shoes as compared with factory or all-machine-made shoes.

=Bend=—leather trade term for the hinder-part of the hide, used
especially in connection with sole leather, this particular portion
being the firmest, toughest, closest-fibered part.

=Bengaline=—general term for silk and woolen fabrics with a repp or
corded effect produced by using a heavy, soft-spun woolen (or cotton)
weft closely covered in the weaving with the silk (or wool) warp threads
so as not to be exposed when finisht; also woven with wide, irregular or
knobby ribs (especially in silk).

=Benjamin=—an overcoat once fashionable in England, invented by a tailor
of that name.

=Benny=—slang for overcoat.

=Benzine=—good to eradicate grease spots. See Slob.

=Berretta=—see Biretta.

=Berlin=—trade term for fabric gloves of cotton in contradistinction to
gloves of silk, lisle or wool.

=Berlin toe=—in shoemaking one of the many names for a narrow toe.

=Bespoke=—“English” for clothes tailored to order.

=Best seller=—that which makes the most profit for the dealer and,
usually, shows the poor taste of his customers.

=Betrothal ring=—a r. that sometimes comes back.

=Betweens=—see Needle.

=Bezel=—a facet of a gem; a seal, as of a ring, fob, etc.; a flat
engraved gold seal.

=Bias=—diagonally.

=Bib=—a drizzle shield.

=Bib top=—trade term applied to overalls made with a sort of apron
partially covering the breast.

=Bicycle hose=—stout woolen or cotton stockings, knee length or longer.

=Bicycle shoe=—a high or low s., with front lacing nearly to the toe,
and with a low heel, the inner corner of which is beveled off to prevent
contact with pedaling gear.

=Bicycle stocking=—same as b. hose.

=Bicycle tights=—just t., but quite heavy.

=Bicycle trousers=—knickerbockers with re-enforced seats.

=Bifocal spectacles=—s. the lenses of which have a smaller lense
adhering to the larger, permitting different ranges of vision. Compare
Compound s.

=Bifurcated=—divided from a point into two divisions—trousers, for
instance.

=Bilbo=—an old term for a flexible kind of cutlas from Bilboa, where the
best Spanish sword blades were made.

=Bilboes=—bolts and shackles used by the Spanish to confine the legs of
prisoners.

=Biled rag=—see Boiled shirt.

=Bill=—generally an unwelcome reminder of a thoughtlessly incurred
obligation.

=Bill book=—a wallet for banknotes and papers.

=Billy=—a thug’s sleep producer.

=Billycock=—Briticism for a bowler or derby (hat), which see (corrupted
from William Coke, Earl of Norfolk, who introduced the hat to
popularity.) Also see Bowler.

=Billygoat whiskers=—long, spiky chinbeard.

=Binding=—any tape or braid used to secure or decorate the edges of a
garment or any article of apparel.

=Birdcage=—slang for umpire’s mask.

=Birdseye=—a small diamond-shaped pattern or effect; name given to
various clear-finisht fabrics so woven; armor.

=Biretta=—a square cap of silk or velvet with three ridges extending
outward from the center of the top or four in case of doctors of
divinity; also worn by the Anglican and Lutheran ministry, the latter
being much plainer. A smoking cap is also so-called.

=Birthday attire=—ideal for hot weather.

=Birthday suit=—public display punishable by fine.

=Bishop=—trade term for extra-length overcoats for tall men.

=Bishop’s lawn=—a variety of lawn (qv) originally made for clerical
vestments.

=Bit=—12½ cents; a shilling; two-bits, 25c.; six-bits, 75c., etc. These
expressions are still used in the southwest.

=B. L.=—overheard by bowlegged men on being measured for trousers.

=Black amber=—jet (qv).

=Black cap=—(=1=) a plain black silk cap assumed by judges of some
criminal courts when pronouncing sentence of death; (=2=) a sort of bag
covering the entire head of the condemned, rendering him semi-oblivious
of his surroundings immediately prior to strangulation.

=Blacking set=—a box or stand containing shoe polishing materials.

=Blacksnake=—a tapering, flexible whip of black leather, used by carters
and sometimes on unruly urchins; name from resemblance to a blacksnake.

=Blade=—the standing portion of a folded (shirt) collar; more
particularly the ends that meet in front.

=Blade=—the shoulder b. See B. measure.

=Blade measure=—in tailoring a measure taken from middle of back to
front of arm scye at level thereof under the arm.

=Blanket=—a sheet of loosely woven heavy woolen cloth, or
wool-and-cotton, usually with a nap, used for a bed covering, a garment,
or to cover a horse.

=Blanket=—in textil designing an experimental strip or length of fabric
(usually 1 to 2 yards), made up of anywhere from 2 to 100 or more
variations of a design or designs, ranging from dark to light color
effects, changes of color being accomplisht in the loom by changing the
shuttles after every few inches of each sample. These “blankets” are
passed upon by designers and stylists to determin the particular
patterns to be adopted; often not over 4 or 5 are chosen from a large b.

=Blanks=—in button making the discs of ivory or other material not
pierced or colored.

=Blarney=—idle discourse; obsequious flattery.

=Blarney tweed=—an unusually fine grade of tweed suitings manufactured
by Mahoney Bros., a famous mill in the north of Ireland. (Mahoney
pronounced Marney.)

=Blather=—idle nonsense.

=Blazer=—a light unlined summer coat, most frequently of flannel, and in
bright parti-colors.

=Bleach=—see Bleaching.

=Bleachery=—a place where textil fabrics are bleacht, whether by
chemical processes or by exposure on a lawn.

=Bleaching=—any process of freeing textil fabrics or fibers from their
natural color; or whitening.

=Bleaching powder=—usually or largely chlorin.

=Bleacht muslin=—whitened; usually of finer weave than unbleacht or
brown m. (=Bleached.=)

=Blended=—furrier’s term for furs so arranged as to form a sort of
shaded pattern.

=Bliaus=—early spelling of blouse.

=Blind edge=—see Plain e.

=Blind eye=—a strongly workt but nearly invisible silk loop or eye used
in connection with hooks for fastening garments, preferable to more
conspicuous metal eyes or catches.

=Blind fly=—a placket fastening, the outer edge of which is closed
instead of open as in the ordinary trousers f.; mostly used on overcoats
and also known as box f. and French f. See Fly.

=Blind pocket=—any concealed p.; oftenest a small p. on the inside of
the waistband of the trousers—perhaps less as a protection against
footpads than one’s wife.

=Blind stitch=—to s. in such a way that the stitches don’t show.

=Bliss tweeds=—peculiar sort of t., slightly resembling whipcord, made
by Wm. Bliss & Sons, Chipping Norton, Eng., rated the finest known and
extensivly employed for fine livery and stable wear.

=Block=—see Tailor’s b.

=Block=—the general style, lines, dimensions, etc., of a hat.

=Block patterns=—tailoring term for (1) conventionalized patterns used
by tailors as a working basis, individual differences being added or
subtracted as necessary; it is claimed that as perfect fitting garments
are produced this way as by drafting separately—and many more of them
per day; (2) similar patterns used by clothing manufacturers, from which
no variations are made, the style being as per pattern, and sizes being
conventionalized—necessarily. A method of garment drafting based on the
principle that like causes produce like effects, which is to say, a
pattern having fitted one man of a given size and attitude, it would fit
any other man of identical proportions and posture; and by proper
variation, as required, would fit a man differing in some respect, thus
saving a special drafting. Block p. are in wide use at the present day
as time savers, a complete range of sizes for each style of garment
usually being carried.

=Block toes=—in shoemaking, t. made with stiffened leather, so as not to
crease.

=Blocking=—a process in hat manufacture wherein the sized cones are
given shape, the crowns and brims being carefully stretched and blocked
out.

=Blood=—a gallant.

=Blood=—the finest wool is that of full-blooded merino sheep; the terms
½-b., ⅜-b., ¼-b., etc., refer to that standard and are coarser in a
descending scale. See Wool.

=Bloody shirt=—fortunately not a washable article, but a term of
reproach reminiscent of Civil War amenities.

=Bloom=—the lustrous effect given to broadcloth, alpaca and other
fabrics by pressing.

=Bloomers=—Zouave trousers appropriated by women during the late bicycle
craze.

=Blouse=—(1) a short, loose shirt or frock, usually of linen or cotton,
with or without belt; (2) a loose jacket or body coat, of military wear;
(3) the characteristic garment of Chinamen—need a description?

=Blouse collar=—same as Prussian c.

=Blow of cotton=—a Southern phrase, employed when the pods of the cotton
plant burst; from the old English “blowth”, a blossoming.

=Blucher=—a peculiar style or pattern used in cutting the upper of a
laced shoe—having tops lapping together at the throat and not joined
together as in plain lace shoes.

=Blue=—the color supposed to exercise a gracious influence over the
budding destinies of, and to be especially becoming and appropriate to,
boy babies as, conversely, pink is for girls.

=Blue=—see Wool.

=Blue book=—broadly, a directory of les noveaux riches.

=Blue dress coat=—(=navy=) for chief petty officers, except bandmasters,
a 4-button double-breasted sack coat of dark blue cloth with 3 outside
pockets (2 lower, 1 breast) with flaps, the coat worn buttoned; for
officers’ stewards and officers’ cooks, the same except with black
buttons instead of gilt.

=Blue jackets=—navy seamen as distinguisht from the marines.

=Blue pencil=—supposed to be specially efficacious in marking down
prices for a “sale”.

=Blue undress coat=—(=navy=) for chief petty officers except
bandmasters, same as blue dress c., but of flannel or serge.

=Blue working dress=—(=navy=) see Working d.

=Bluestocking=—not an article of attire, but a Bostonprig.

=Bluff edge=—in tailoring a variety of plain e. (qv) not made by hand,
but by first sewing the edges of garment together wrong side out, then
turning and pressing flat without other finish; a cheap substitute for
felled or prickt edges (qv).

=Bluff try-on=—not a real one, just a bluff. See Dummy t. (Tailoring
term.)

=Blunderbuss=—a short fire arm with a large bore and a wide mouth.

=Blunts=—see Needle.

=Boarded calf=—see below.

=Boarding=—a term used in the leather trade, denoting a process of
making leather supple and raising the grain after shaving, dyeing, etc.,
by doubling it with the flesh side in and working the folds back and
forth by a graining board.

=Boarding officer’s uniform=—see Custom officer’s u.

=Boardwalk=—the ocean promenade at Atlantic City, where, in season, and
on Easter Sunday particularly, those who have them proceed to strut up
and down showing off their new clothes.

=Boat cloak=—a cape or mantle for use of (naval) officers in a (small)
boat.

=Boater=—British for the stiff, straight-brimmed straw hat known here as
“yacht” shape. See Straw hat.

=Boatswain’s uniform=—(=navy=) see Special full dress, Full dress,
Dress, Undress, Service dress; (=revenue cutter service=) Full dress,
Service dress. See also variations.

=Bob=—see Bob-wig and Wig.

=Bobbin=—a slender spool or reel used in the shuttle of a loom,
conveying the weft or filling.

=Bob-jerom=—a bob wig.

=Bobtailed=—short tailed—give it any application you fancy.

=Bob-wig=—a small or medium size w. of the time of George II;
specifically, minor b.-w. and major b.-w., the latter with several rows
of curls.

=Bodkin=—a needle-like instrument for piercing holes in cloth, or for
drawing tape thru hems, etc.

=Body-coat=—a dress c.; an under-c.; a close-fitting c.; a livery c.

=Body-cover=—cant for coat.

=Bogus=—counterfeit or of inferior quality, as manipulated cloth.

=Boil out=—trade term indicating the quality of a piece of goods, as
“this will boil out”, meaning if woolen, the goods will in the boiling
potash test resolve into nothing without trace of cotton or similar
non-boilable adulterant. See Boiling-o. test.

=Boiled off=—commercial term for Shantung silk, to distinguish from silk
“in the gum”.

=Boiled shirt=—inelegant for a white shirt with stiff linen bosom.

=Boiling-out test=—a means employed to determin the quality of suspected
woolen or silk fabrics, a piece of the goods being boiled in a solution
of potash, in which the wool or silk is consumed, but any cotton therein
remains. See also Acid t. and Cotton cheat.

=Bolt=—a rolled or folded quantity of goods, of various yardage,
according to the fabric or material. Cloth usually runs 40 to 60 yards
to the b.

=Bombast=—cotton or other material of soft, loose texture, employed for
padding garments; wadding.

=Bombazine=—a light, plain woven fabric of silk warp and worsted weft,
used for mourning.

=Bonbon=—general trade term for fine lisle and balbriggan underwear and
hosiery manufactured by C. & G. Bonbon et Cie, Troyes, France; also C.
Bonbon et Cie, Paris.

=Bone=—journeyman tailors’ term for a peculiar hard feeling noticeable
in the handling of certain kinds of cloths, as heavy overcoatings and
experienct especially in working the needle thru; as, “it has a bone in
it”.

=Bonnet=—a Scotch cap.

=Book muslin=—a thin, glazed, starch-filled cotton fabric, often
mechanically crinkled, used for cheap cap linings, etc.

=Boon=—the woody core of flax.

=Boot=—a leather or other foot covering differing from a shoe (qv) in
that it reaches usually to the knee or above. In England the word boot
is synonymous with our word shoe.

=Boot=—a leather or rubber-cloth flap fastened to the front or dashboard
of a carriage or coach and drawn up over the lap of the rider as a
protection against rain, etc.

=Bootblack=—an irreverent urchin who “shines” the fronts of your shoes,
but forgets the heels.

=Boot-hook=—an implement to pull boots on with.

=Boot-hose=—spatterdashes; stirrup h.

=Boot-jack=—a wooden or metal contrivance for engaging the heel of a
boot while the wearer drags himself out therefrom.

=Boot-last=—same as b.-tree.

=Boot-lick=—a flunkey; a hanger-on; one who cringes and flatters to
obtain favors.

=Boot powder=—powdered soapstone to make tight boots go on easier.

=Boot slippers=—light, soft leather feet for wear inside of rubber
boots.

=Boot-straps=—the loops sewed in the back part of boots for the purpose
of pulling them on.

=Boot stud=—a small, steel roset having prominent sharp points at right
angles to the back; used by golf players and others for surety of
footing; 8 to 12 are required for a pair of boots, affixt by screws or
cleats.

=Boot-tree=—a stretcher for shaping boots when not in use.

=Bootee=—an infant’s knit woolen foot covering.

=Bootmaker=—Briticism for what we call shoemaker.

=Boots=—a servant, usually a boy or young man, at an inn, hotel, club,
etc., who blacks boots and performs other small services for guests.

=Bosom=—the front or display part of a shirt, specifically known
according to style, shape, etc., as dress b., puff b., shield b.,
plaited b., etc.

=Botany=—trade diminutiv for the line of cloths made by the Botany
mills, Passaic, N. J. A peculiarity of these goods is that they closely
approximate fine imported goods, being woven by German workmen (mostly)
on imported German looms.

=Botch work=—bungled.

=Bottle coat=—a proprietary term for a certain style of form fitting
overcoat. (1907.)

=Bottle nest=—a leather case with 3 or 4 bottles snugly fitted; for the
spiritual refreshment of travelers.

=Bottom=—trousers seat.

=Bottom facing=—in tailoring the strip of goods turned up within or
sewed on along the inside of a garment, as of a vest or coat.

=Boucle=—an irregular curly-faced fabric, the effect being produced by
the use of a two-ply yarn in which one thread is wound around the other
and drawn to make curls or loops at uneven distances; properly a rough,
lobby, sort of “worsted cheviot”, tho frequently made with a jersey or
stockinet body.

=Boughten=—past participle of “to buy”, in which the archaic termination
is still preserved; like gotten, putten, etc., serving to distinguish
shop-bought goods from home manufactures.

=Bound-edge=—in tailoring, covered or bound with braid; for this purpose
edges of the garment itself are often left raw. See Flat b.,
Half-and-half-b., Narrow b.

=Bounder=—English slang for one who dresses in bad taste, or whose
manners, etc., are offensiv; a “cheap dude”.

=Bouquet hole=—the buttonhole in a coat lapel.

=Bourre=—a sort of silk shoddy.

=Bourette=—a woolen cloth with lumps or knobs at intervals over its
surface, an effect produced by manipulation of warp and weft yarns
before weaving.

=Bournous=—a long woolen cloak with hood, worn by men in the Orient.

=Boutonniere=—a little bunch of flowers; the principal excuse for the
lapel buttonhole.

=Bow=—that part of a pair of spectacles clasping the temple or engaging
behind the ear.

=Bow tie=—a t. tied in a bowknot.

=Bowback=—rather humped.

=Bowie knife=—a long, formidable weapon, sometimes over a foot in length
and two inches broad, worn by hunters and desperadoes in the wilder and
more unsettled parts of the Union. One kind is facetiously called
Arkansas toothpick. The term “bowie” was derived from a notorious
character, Colonel Jim Bowie.

=Bowk=—a step in the process of cotton bleaching, being boiling in weak
lye.

=Bowlegged=—parenthetical.

=Bowler=—the common English name for the derby hat, from the name of the
hatter who invented it. See also Billycock.

=Box calf=—a trademark or fancy name for boarded c. (qv).

=Box cloth=—a superior quality of thick, heavy beaver c. of close, hard
texture, fulled and milled until practically waterproof; similar to
pilot c. and in appearance midway between melton and beaver, and not
unlike kersey; also called livery c.

=Box coat=—(1) a short, loose fitting top c.; (2) a coachman’s driving
c., with or without cape.

=Box collar=—a high-banded Prussian or military (coat) c.

=Box fly=—see Blind f.

=Box-plait=—a plait flattened with the stitching midway underneath so
that there is a leaf or fold on each side of the stitching. Compare
One-way p.

=Box toe=—having a stiff piece of sole leather inserted under the upper
leather around the toe of a shoe to make it stand up as a solid
protection for the human toes.

=Box waterproof=—a coachman’s mackintosh.

=Boxing glove=—a padded leather mitten that can hurt.

=Boxy=—loose fitting.

=Boy=—the kid who is supposed to be everywhere and everything, and
generally is, except when wanted.

=Brab=—the sheaf of the young leaves of the Palmyra palm, from which
“sennit” for hats is made.

=Braces=—English for suspenders; American for suspender-harness for
correcting stoop-shoulders and other light deformities.

=Bradford system=—weaving term for worsted yarns spun by a method
carrying that name, (see textil encyclopedia) producing a harder yarn
than by the French system (qv) of spinning on mules.

=Bradford yarns=—see above. See also English y.

=Braid=—a narrow textil band or tape formed by plaiting together or
crossing diagonally and lengthwise several threads of silk, cotton,
mohair or other material, in a manner to achieve a certain width, style,
pattern or effect, known in trade as silk b., mohair b., hercules b.,
soutache b., flat b., half-and-half b., etc. Used for binding coat
edges, etc., and decorativly, as in uniforms.

=Braid combing=—wool classification term. See Wool.

=Braided edges=—see Bound e., Braiding, etc.

=Braided seam=—a s. covered with braid laid on and stitched.

=Braiding=—the process of forming tape or cord like fabrics in which
threads held longitudinally, are woven diagonally in and out of each
other.

=Braiding=—the act or operation of binding or decorating a garment with
braid.

=Brakeman’s uniform=—varies with different roads; usually a sack suit of
blue cloth, the coat being most frequently double-breasted with brass
buttons; blue cloth cap.

=Brandenburgs=—long, narrow, ornamental buttons of silk or wool on a
wooden mold, used chiefly for military overcoats; also known as olives.

=Brass=—impudent assurance.

=Brass buttons=—slang for over-gaudy uniforms, livery, etc.

=Brass knuckles=—see Knucks.

=Brassard=—(=army, navy, etc.=) (1) a band of white cloth usually about
4 in. wide, fastened around the upper part of the right sleeve, a red
Geneva cross, 3 in. in hight and width, having arms 1 in. wide, stitched
or painted upon it; (2) a similar band of black cloth or crepe worn for
mourning.

=Brave=—a swaggering fellow; a rowdyish gallant; a roystering fop.

=Bravery=—elegance of attire; finery.

=Brazilian linen=—a fiber obtained from a common South American weed,
possessing strength, fineness, flexibility and adaptability for
bleaching, dyeing, etc., expected soon to be a popular substitute for
flax in nearly all its uses.

=Breach=—see Wool.

=Break=—see Collar b.

=Break=—trade term for tender wool that breaks when stretched—a defectiv
condition caused by exposure, insufficient feeding, etc.

=Breakfast jacket=—(1) a house coat; (2) a butler’s morning coat.

=Breaking test=—in general, linen fabrics are more difficult to break
than those of cotton. The broken edge of linen shows threads that are
long and irregular, the projecting fibers being parallel and lustrous.
The broken edge of cotton cloth exhibits twisted threads, the fibers
being uniform in length and dull in appearance. Practise further enables
the operator to distinguish linen from cotton by the sound when the
fabric is torn, linen emitting a shrill, and cotton a dull, sound.
Furthermore, when a group of threads is quickly broken, the cotton
threads twist around each other, while the linen threads hang straight.

=Breast=—the front of the chest.

=Breast cord=—(=army=) a decorativ loop of cord and tassels of mohair,
of the color of the corps, department or arm of service, worn on the
front of the dress coat of enlisted men, from left shoulder to below
right arm; a variety of aigulet (qv).

=Breast of heel=—(shoemaking) the back of the heel.

=Breast pocket=—any p. inserted in or placed on the breast of a coat or
vest, whether outside or inside, tho the latter are generally so
specified.

=Breast protector=—a sort of inflated canvas-and-leather shield worn by
baseball and cricket players, fencers, etc.

=Breech=—see Wool.

=Breech cloth=—better than nothing.

=Breech clout=—same.

=Breeches=—a shaped leg-covering reaching to the knee, closing snugly at
that point with several buttons. Compare Knickerbockers. See also Riding
b.

=Breeches hooks=—used in 18th century to suspend the tight, fashionable
breeches of the times from the ceiling, the wearer mounting upon the
steps and letting himself down in the garments.

=Breeches tree=—a wooden form for keeping coachmen’s breeches in shape
while not in use.

=Breeks=—Scotch for breeches.

=Bretelles=—French for suspenders or braces.

=Bricklayer’s glove=—a sort of leather mitten to which separable heavy
leather tips are attacht by means of metal clips, the wrist having a
resilient metal clamp. More loosely, any heavy working glove.

=Bridgewater=—a variety of broadcloth once manufactured at Bridgewater,
England.

=Brigadier=—see Wig.

=Brigadier general’s uniform=—(=army=) see Full dress, Dress u., White
u., Service u.; (=marine corps=) Special full dress, Full dress, Mess
dress, Undress, Field dress. Also see variants.

=Bright=—tailor’s argot for any bright technical idea or suggestion.

=Brilliant=—jeweler’s term for a diamond of the finest cutting and
quality; general slang for all diamonds and sparkling gems.

=Brilliant cutting=—the most common style of diamond cutting, consisting
of two pyramids joined at their bases, the upper one or crown being
truncated to form the table, the lower or pavilion ending in a point
called the collet. Compare Twentieth century c.

=Brilliant lisle=—highly calendered. See Lisle.

=Brilliantine=—a light, thin, plain woven and very lustrous fabric,
similar to alpaca. See Mohair.

=Brim=—the piazza part of a hat.

=Briolette=—a diamond, generally pear or drop shaped, cut with angular
or long facets.

=Britch=—same as breach—a wool classification term. See Wool.

=British=—trade term for unbleacht cotton hose.

=Broad bound=—same as flat b. Compare Narrow b. and Half-and-half b.

=Broad goods=—cloth wider than 29 in.

=Broad silks=—trade term for woven silk fabrics for dress and lining
purposes.

=Broadcloth=—for men’s wear, a high grade woolen cloth woven of the
finest of felting wool, usually first dyed in the raw; the woven fabric
is fulled to a considerable degree and slightly napt and sheared, then
steamed, calendered and prest to add luster, the better grades being
made with a twilled back. Broadcloth for women’s wear is a lighter
fabric and not so costly. Name originally used in contradistinction to
Narrow cloth.

=Broadfalls=—trade name for front fall trousers in which the front flap
or fall extends from side to side or nearly to the pockets. See Fall
bearer. Compare Narrow f.

=Broadtail=—apologetic term for the fur of the unborn lamb of the black
Persian sheep of Russia; distinguisht from Persian lamb (qv) by the
degree of mottling or moire effect of the rich black surface; also
called baby lamb.

=Brocade=—a rich fabric of silk, cotton or wool (or combinations
thereof, sometimes intermixt with tinsel) having a pattern in slight
relief, produced by raising the threads of the warp or of the weft in
the loom; the patterns are mostly floral.

=Broche=—a term signifying stitcht or embroidered, applied to fabrics
worn with a raised design; having such appearance; a sort of brocade.

=Brodekin=—a buskin or high boot (obsolete).

=Brogan=—a coarse, heavy shoe fastened by side flaps buckled or laced
over a short tongue or instep-piece; forerunner of the modern Blucher
shoe (qv).

=Brogue=—(1) a rude shoe of untanned hide, (originally with the hair
outside) tied with thongs, worn formerly in Ireland and the Scotch
highlands. See Brogan. (2) Among seamen, coarse sandals made of green
hide.

=Brogues=—trousers (obsolete).

=Broken twill=—one of the technical names for herringbone weave.

=Brooch=—an ornamental article of jewelry fastened by means of a hinged
pin; a shawl-clasp.

=Broom brush=—upper class tradesmen’s term for whisk broom.

=Brotus=—the heaping up of a measure; what is thrown in to make sure of
good weight. Used in Charleston, South Carolina, and exactly equivalent
to the Gumbo-French word lagniappe of New Orleans.

=Brown=—unbleacht.

=Brown=—see Wool.

=Brown holland=—plain, wide linen cloth, but slightly thickened; used
for dusters, summer clothing, etc.

=Brown muslin=—just as it leaves the looms; not bleacht; usually woven
coarser than that intended to be bleacht.

=Brownies=—diminutiv apron overalls for little tads of 3 years up.

=Brummagem=—sham jewelry as originally made in Burmingham, Eng. See
Attleborough.

=Brunswick=—union or part wool cassimere.

=Brush length=—trade term for narrow width haircloth.

=Brushing=—a polishing or finishing process in shoemaking, rapidly
revolving brushes made of bristles or soft pieces of cloth being used to
polish and brush up the shoe as a final finishing operation.

=Brushing machine=—(1) an apparatus for laying the nap on cloths, hats,
etc.; (2) an apparatus for dusting hats, shoes, etc.

=Bryks=—breeches (obsolete).

=Buck=—a dandy.

=Buckeen=—Irish dude.

=Bucket tops=—top boots. See French falls.

=Buckle=—a fastening device, in clothing used specially for tightening
the waist of trousers, waistcoats, etc.

=Buckler=—cant term for collar.

=Bucko=—a dandy; corruption of “buck”.

=Buckram=—a coarse, heavy, plain-woven linen or cotton material sized
with glue, used for stiffening, as in coat fronts.

=Buckskin=—a sort of doeskin or kersey, but stouter and with bolder,
clearer twill, chiefly used for riding breeches, livery wear, etc.

=Buckskin=—(1) soft sheepskin; (2 pl) breeches or trousers made of b.

=Buckskin=—proprietary name for an improved sort of gum tissue for hems,
seams, etc.

=Bucktails=—a name given to the 13th Pennsylvania Reserves (also known
as 1st Pennsylvania Rifles and Kane Rifles, from one of the commanders)
famous thruout the Civil War for their rare fighting qualities and from
the habit of the men of wearing a bucktail in their hats, which a Grand
Army post of the survivors perpetuates.

=Buff clothes=—none at all.

=Buff coat=—a jerkin or doublet of leather (?) worn by certain colonial
troopers of 17th century.

=Buffalo=—see B. robe.

=Buffalo cloth=—a shaggy fabric woven in imitation of b. fur.

=Buffalo horn=—trade term for buttons made of horn, bone, etc., in
contradistinction to imitations thereof, distinguished by greater
clearness and irregular markings of color.

=Buffalo robe=—a rug or covering made of the hide with the hair on. More
commonly called “buffalo”.

=Bugazeen=—an old term for calico.

=Bugs of Egypt=—a style of waistcoat buttons popular in the early part
of the last century; probably in imitation of scarabeii.

=Bull muck=—in yarn spinning an expression meaning careless, slovenly
making of unclean, tangled and otherwise imperfect “tops”. (British.)

=Bulldog golf cap=—a large g. c., setting well back on the head, with a
visor dependent almost vertically.

=Bulldog toe=—a very heavy broad toe; a shoe style that was very popular
some years ago and still obtains.

=Bullet-proof cloth=—a fabric (recently invented by a German priest) of
mysterious composition, quite thick and heavy, having the property of
stopping shot and bullets fired at it; various other similar fabrics
have since been invented.

=Bull’s-wool-and-oakum=—salesmen’s slang term for very coarse clothing
fabrics of inferior quality.

=Bullion=—a slender barrel-shaped ornament of gold or silver wire or
thread in coils, groupt to form tassels, as for chapeaux, etc.

=Bullion fringe=—an ornamental fringe of heavy twisted cords covered
with gold or silver threads, used for uniforms, regalia, etc.

=Bumbershoot=—vulgar for umbrella.

=Bumpers=—metal corners used on trunks; sole leather corners on hand
luggage.

=Bumpkin=—an awkward, provincial dude.

=Bunching=—Briticism expressing a uniformity of appearance permitting
two or more pieces of the same fabric to be sold as same shade or
effect. Handspun and hand woven homespuns, for instance, cannot be
buncht because of unevenness, but by the use of mill-spun yarn b.
becomes possible.

=Bung=—cant term for a purse or pocket.

=Bunion=—in shoemaking, a specially comfortable shape of shoe, usually
quite plain without tips, for tender feet with enlarged joints, etc.

=Bunk=—a sleeping berth.

=Bunting=—a light-weight, plain woven woolen fabric of loose
construction; used for flags, and in a limited manner in men’s wear.

=Burberry cheviot=—a variety of wool c., twill woven in fancy patterns,
used as a suiting.

=Burberry cloth=—a medium to light-weight waterproof fabric, of
mercerized cotton warp and weft, with a fine round cord like repps,
employed for automobile garments, raincoats, etc. A lighter weight
fabric of the same class is known as Roseberry c.

=Bureau trunk=—a t. opening on a diagonal line, setting flat against the
wall, and composed of tray-compartments in tiers, suggesting a bureau
when opened.

=Burgonette=—an iron helmet or cap with neckpieces worn by French
pikemen of 16th century.

=Burlaps=—a sort of gunny sacking.

=Burning test=—burnt ends of linen threads after the flame is
extinguisht appear smooth and compact, while the fibers of cotton
threads treated in the same way are spread out more or less in brush
form. Wool and silk exhibit charred knobs.

=Burnishing=—a finishing or polishing operation for completing the
heels, bottoms and edges of a shoe.

=Burnt cork=—used by minstrels to blacken the skin.

=Burring=—in wool-cleansing the mechanical process of removing burs and
other foreign substances from the fleece before the initial spinning
process. Compare Carbonizing.

=Busby=—a tall fur cap, with or without a plume, and with a bag hanging
from the top over the right side, worn by British hussars, artillerymen
and engineers.

=Bushel=—to alter, repair or remedy the fit of a garment.

=Bushel=—a tailor’s thimble.

=Bushelman=—a tailor or workman who does alteration or repair work.

=Business coat=—usually meaning a sack c.

=Business cutaway=—see Morning frock c.; English walking coat.

=Buskin=—a sort of knee length boot with leather sole and cloth leg;
worn 17th and 18th centuries.

=Bust=—properly, a glorious feminin physical development, but also used
in a limited way as expressiv of a man’s chest.

=Buster Brown=—almost as distressing as Little Lord Fauntleroyism.

=Butcher’s coat=—a long frock worn by butchers and drivers of meat
wagons; usually of stout gingham, duck, etc.

=Butcher’s linen=—a stout, coarse, white l. used for backing shirt
bosoms, etc.

=Butler’s livery=—(morning) Tuxedo or breakfast jacket, low-cut
waistcoat and trousers, white shirt, black tie, black shoes; (evening)
dress coat, low-cut waistcoat, trousers, white shirt and white tie,
black shoes. A fancy waistcoat is permissible with evening suit in clubs
and hotels.

=Butt rest=—a leather thingummy strapped across the body by lazy and
weak salmon and tarpon fishers.

=Butteker=—cant term for shop.

=Butterfly=—a shaped tie for wear with folded collars.

=Butternut=—the coarse brown homespun cloths and jeans woven prior to
and during the Civil War, colored brown with a dye from the butternut
tree.

=Button=—a device for fastening or ornamenting articles of apparel,
usually round, and designated in the trade according to composition,
shape, style, purpose, etc., as silk braid b., mohair b., lasting b.,
cloth b., hard rim b., ivory b., rubber b., composition b., bone b.,
pearl b., horn b., gilt b., etc.; flat b., cup b., ¼ round b., ½ round
b., shank b., 2 hole b., 4 hole b., uniform b., pants b., vest b., coat
b., overcoat b., etc.; all of which see.

=Button board=—a heavy brown paper or pulp b., used in filling the
shells of covered buttons.

=Button flaps=—trade term for buttoned f. over hip pockets in trousers.

=Button fly=—tailoring term meaning a placket which conceals the buttons
of the opposit side or part of the garment.

=Button machine=—a machine for making cloth covered buttons, operated by
hand power.

=Button mold=—a wooden shape to be covered with braid, cloth, etc.; also
often of metal.

=Button stand=—an allowance or addition to the right forepart of a coat
or vest for the sewing on of buttons, usually 1½ inches on
single-breasted coats and ¾ of an inch on vests.

=Button-stay=—a strip of linen canvas interplaced between cloth and
lining for the purpose of giving strength for button stress.

=Button strap=—a strip of thin leather or cloth stitcht to the inside of
shoe tops thru which, for greater strength, the buttons are sewed or
attacht by patent fasteners.

=Button thru=—said when a coat or other garment or part thereof is made
without a fly and with buttonholes cut thru from face to back, the
buttons, of course, showing—a labored explanation, but plain?

=Buttonhole=—(1) a workt aperture to receive a button and fasten a
garment; (2) a fingering place for politicians and borrowers.

=Buttonhole chisel=—a straight, thin steel tool with a wood handle, used
for punching buttonholes thru many thicknesses of material.

=Buttonhole cutter=—a device like a pair of pliers with a cutting blade
for uniformly cutting buttonholes.

=Buttonhole making=—the cut edges of the b. are first roughly overcast
by plain or loopt stitch, fastening in place at the same time a cord or
thread all around the cut opening, which is then finisht by close, even
loopt stitches. On cotton and linen goods the cording is omitted. Of
handmade buttonholes in tailoring there are several varieties, chief of
which are the flat or satin stitcht b. and the gimp or coarse b.

=Buttonhole stitch=—a regular close loopt s. used in garment making. See
B. making.

=Buttonhole twist=—a loose 8 strand, 3 cord silk thread that in working
tightens up, making a firm, solid, durable buttonhole. See also Machine
t. and Sewing silk.

=Buttonhook=—a metal device for buttoning shoes without injury to
fingernails and temper.

=Buttons=—(1) a page’s coat single-breasted, short, close fitting, with
standing collar, closing with 19 buttons, whence name; (2) the lad
himself.

=Butts=—cleaned and prepared hides, ready for tanning.

=Buyer=—the head of a department in a large store who, of course, never
knows as much as his clerks.

=Buzz-saw test=—name given to a demonstration of the comparativ
composition of various makes of shoes, including their own, by the Regal
Shoe Co., in which, usually in a show window, numbers of shoes were
sawed thru on a circular saw and the edges exposed and otherwise
explained to the spectators. The demonstration is understood to be
protected under trade mark laws.

=Byron collar=—name given to a lay-down shirt c., the fronts of which
are not creased, but broadly and softly rolled; much affected by artists
and the Bohemian gentry.

=Byron roll=—see above.

=By the candle=—in old England a mode of auction by which people were
allowed to bid during the burning of an inch of candle, the goods being
knockt down after the light had gone out to the highest bidder.


                                   C

=Caba=—a small traveling bag or valise; nearly obsolete.

=Cabasset=—a light morion or iron cap with a wide drooping brim, worn by
French infantry of 16th century.

=Cabin bag=—a hand b. or valise with straight boxy sides, opening not
from a center point, but from the sides at the roof angles, the two top
parts coming together and clamping to form a cover.

=Cable seam=—see Round s.

=Cable silk webbing=—trade term for elastic w. woven with a roundish
twill, an effect helpt by a twisted instead of flat silk thread.

=Cable yarn=—y. twisted coarsely, like a rope.

=Cachemire=—in textil designing, signifying Persian or other Oriental
patterns.

=Cachi=—a small, felt cap, in red, brown or white, surmounted with a
tassel in a contrasting color, worn by Arabs—sometimes one on top of
another or several others. See also Haik.

=Cacks=—our first baby shoes.

=Cadet=—(1) glove trade term for long fingers; (2) a shade of gray; (3)
a student at a military school; (4) something worse.

=Cadet cloth=—the standard blue-gray woolen uniform c. prescribed by the
U. S. Military and Naval Academies and by various schools and
institutions of similar character for cadet dress; the color effect is
usually a combination of indigo blue and white yarns.

=Cadet collar=—a highhanded Prussian c.: also called stand-and-fall c.

=Cadet overcoat=—an outercoat that appeared during the winter of
1907–08; both single and double-breasted, buttoning to the throat, with
a high Prussian collar. Also known as West Point o., army o., automobile
o.

=Cadet uniforms=—(=Annapolis=) for Dress—a jacket resembling that of
Special full dress (qv) of commissioned officers of the navy, except
that it is cut Eton shape, without tails, with narrow braid on collar;
dress trousers, dress cap and white gloves. Service dress—blouse
resembling that of commissioned officers, waistcoat (optional), service
trousers and dress cap. The trousers, both dress and undress, in general
the same as for commissioned officers, but cut higher in the waist and
without pockets. Working dress for drill—canvas jumper and trousers,
white hat or knit cap, as ordered, black silk neckerchief, jersey or
sweater, all, in general, corresponding to similar articles worn by
enlisted men.

=Cadet uniforms=—(=revenue cutter service=) for Full dress—a
single-breasted fly-front sack coat of dark blue cloth reaching to top
of inseam of trousers, having a standing collar, the collar edges and
side seams in back trimmed with lustrous black mohair braid, and with
grade marks, devices, etc., as prescribed. For Service dress—a similar
coat, omitting the sleeve ornaments and some of the braiding. Trousers
of dark blue cloth, cut full in the legs without bottom spring, two hip
pockets only; blue cloth waistcoat; blue cloth cap; blue cloth overcoat,
with hood; also the white u. and other garments as prescribed.

=Cadet uniforms=—(=West Point=) for Dress—a gray cloth coatee,
conforming closely to the shape of the wearer, single-breasted, with
three rows of 8 gilt ball buttons in front and 12 on the skirts in rows
of 3; standing collar with a ball button on each side, ball buttons on
cuffs, the garment trimmed and decorated with black braid. For Undress
or Fatigue—a single-breasted blouse with standing collar, fly front,
trimmed with black braid; insignia, etc., as per regulations. Trousers,
in winter, gray cloth with a black stripe 1 in. wide down the sides; in
summer, white duck; for riding, gray kersey riding trousers with brown
canvas leggings. Overcoat, gray kersey, double-breasted, with
stand-and-fall collar, 6 gilt buttons down each breast, 2 at hips and 1
on back plaits; cape of same material. Badges, stripes, insignia, etc.,
as per regulations.

=Cady=—a hat.

=Caftan=—(1) a black garment almost identical with the Anglican cassock,
worn by the Mohammedan priesthood; (2) an undercoat having long sleeves
and girdled with a sash, worn in Turkey, Arabia, Egypt, etc.

=Calendering=—a mechanical process in cotton and linen finishing,
imparting a smooth, even surface or gloss.

=Calfskin=—a fine, durable shoe leather; often shortened to calf.

=Calico=—a coarse printed cotton cloth; used in the cheapest grade of
shirts, etc.

=Callimanco=—a glossy, woolen stuff, both plain and ribbed, very
fashionable and much used up to Revolutionary times.

=Camblet=—see Camlet.

=Cambric=—(1) a fine, white linen fabric used for handkerchiefs, etc.;
(2) a fine cotton fabric in imitation of linen; (3) also a heavier
glazed cotton lining material.

=Cambric=—see Ramie.

=Camelshair=—the fine, wooly hair from the neck and back of the camel.

=Camelshair cloth=—a thick, soft, shaggy material, usually woven like
cheviot, having long hairs intersperst over its surface.

=Camisol=—(1) a kind of jacket or under-waistcoat without sleeves; (2) a
kind of straight-jacket (qv) with long sleeves which may be tied behind
the sufferer’s back.

=Camlet=—a stiff, closely woven fabric having a wavy surface, nearly
waterproof, originally worn of camels-hair (whence name) but now mostly
of Angora wool, silk and wool, or wool-and-cotton or linen; once largely
used for cloaks; best known in 17th and 18th centuries.

=Camlet yarn=—a y. made in Turkey from the long, silky hair of the
Angora goat; also called Turkish y.

=Camleteen=—a worsted camlet; an imitation camlet.

=Camletto=—see Camleteen.

=Campaign wig=—supposed to be a simplification of the pompous peruke
(which had become exceedingly arrogant in the time of William and Mary)
yet really quite a pretentious affair, tho worn for traveling and for
undress.

=Campbell stitcht=—refers to one of many processes in modern mechanical
shoemaking.

=Camphor=—bad for moths.

=Camping shoe=—see Moccasin s.

=Cancellations=—the negativing or voiding of orders given; a matter of
diplomatic difference between mills and manufacturers, et al.

=Cane=—a walking stick.

=Cannon pocket=—oh, murderous hip p.!

=Canoe carrier=—a pneumatic cushion somewhat like a life preserver to
prevent canoes shifting and chafing whilst en portage.

=Canonical inch=—the inch or so of hair, continuing down in front of the
ears, affected as whiskers by Anglican clergymen.

=Canonicals=—clergymen’s officiating clothing as prescribed by canon.

=Cantab=—a variety of thin leather used for suspender ends.

=Canteen=—a drinking flask, usually worn slung by a strap from a
shoulder.

=Canton flannel=—a stout twilled cotton cloth with a dense nap on one
side, largely used for underwear. Also made with a nap on both sides.

=Cantsloper=—a sort of mackintosh or weather-coat of Colonial days.

=Canvas=—(1) a coarse, plain-woven fabric of linen or cotton, used both
bleacht and unbleacht, for tropical clothing, yachting wear, shoes,
etc., etc.; (2) also a stiffening material, usually unbleacht, used in
tailoring. See Elastic c.

=Canvasers=—in ready-to-wear clothing manufacture workmen who baste
canvas interlinings, padding, etc., into place in the shells (of coats)
as received from the closers (qv).

=Cap=—a covering for the head, of various shapes and materials, less
formal than a hat.

=Cap=—in shoemaking, the same as tip (qv).

=Cap-a-pie=—thoroly equipt from head to foot.

=Cap device=—an insignia of rank, etc., worn in uniform caps.

=Cap-of-maintenance=—an ornamental and ceremonial c. of scarlet velvet
and ermine borne before kings of England at their coronation; also
before the mayors of some British cities on similar occasions.

=Cape=—(1) a circular covering for the shoulders; (2) the inside yoke of
a coat, formed of the lining.

=Cape Ann hat=—same as Squam h., except the crown is soft instead of
stiff.

=Cape Ann suit=—a s. of oiled or painted waterproof material worn by
fishermen, sailors, et al., consisting of a coat buttoning or clasping
close to the throat with a laid over fly, overalls and a sou’wester hat
of same material.

=Cape cap=—a c. commonly of rubber, with visor and deep apron covering
head, neck and shoulders.

=Cape coat=—an overcoat with a cape and with or without sleeves. See
also Inverness.

=Capeskin=—trade name for cape goatskin, used for gloves.

=Capote=—a hooded coat or cloak; a military overcoat.

=Captain’s uniform=—(=army=) see Special full dress, Full dress, Dress,
Service Dress, Evening dress, Mess dress, Undress; (=marine corps=)
Special full dress, Full dress, Mess dress, Undress, Field dress;
(=revenue cutter service=) Full dress, Dress, Service dress, Social full
dress. See also variations thereof.

=Capuchin=—see next.

=Capuchon=—a hood attacht to an overcoat or ulster.

=Caracul=—Astrakhan fur (qv).

=Carat=—(1) a twenty-fourth part, used to express the fineness of
alloyed gold, as 18 c. is ¹⁸⁄₂₄ (or ¾) pure gold; 24 c. pure or
unalloyed; (2) a unit of weight for precious stones; the international
c. is 3.168 grains or 205 milligrams.

=Carbonized wool=—see below.

=Carbonizing=—a chemical process of removing (by charring) all foreign
vegetable substances, as burs, from wool fleece, preparatory to the
initial spinning processes. Compare Burring.

=Card=—short for loom-c.

=Card case=—a small leather wallet or metal c. for visiting cards.

=Card-clothing=—sheets of rubber or leather with wire bristles or teeth
used for covering the cylinders in wool-carding machinery.

=Cardigan jacket=—a close-fitting, knit ribbed woolen or worsted
body-j., with or without sleeves; a sort of collarless sweater with a
buttoned front.

=Carding=—the process of opening up the fibers of wool, flax, hemp,
silk, etc., for the purpose of cleaning them of foreign matter and
rendering the material fine and soft, preparatory to spinning into yarn.

=Carding wool=—fine fleece 2 to 4 inches long. See Clothing w.

=Carmelite=—a fine woolen stuff, usually undyed or natural color, used
mostly for women’s wear.

=Carpet bag=—an old-fashioned hand b. or valise for traveling;
reminiscent of Lincoln’s time.

=Carpet slippers=—Christmas gifts.

=Carr’s=—trade diminutiv for the fine melton cloths made by Carr, Son &
Co., London.

=Carreau=—in weaving, a small check, square or diamond-shaped effect.

=Carrot-top=—red haired.

=Carroting=—one of the initial processes in preparing hat furs for
felting—a treatment of nitric acid and quicksilver while the fur is
still on the skin.

=Carry-all=—a hunter’s pack bag.

=Carsey=—old name for kersey.

=Carton=—a pasteboard box.

=Caruso pocket=—see Raincoat p.

=Cash=—an imperativ diminutive for cash-boy or cash-girl.

=Cash=—an alleged vulgar and disreputable word for money.

=Cash-boy=—a young imp who feels that you would rather flirt with the
saleslady than catch the 5:14 train and so delays bringing back your
parcel and change.

=Cashier=—a dispenser of pay envelopes and receiver of customer’s cash.

=Cashmere=—a fine grade of wool; properly from the c. goat; used largely
for underwear.

=Cashmere=—(1) a fine twilled, soft finisht woolen fabric; used for
vestings and suitings; (2) a knitted underwear fabric, properly of c.
wool, tho as often (or oftener) of other similar wools.

=Cashmere glove=—a fabric g. of fine worsted yarn with a nap inside.

=Cashmerette=—an old-time material for fancy waistcoats.

=Casket cloth=—a light-weight c. resembling cheap grades of melton, of
wool, wool waste, cotton, etc., and used for our final overcoating.

=Casque=—a sort of helmet.

=Cassimere=—general term for a large class of woolen cloths for men’s
wear, coarse and fine, both plain and twill woven, having the pattern
produced in the loom, and usually appearing in distinct checks, plaids
and stripes; the cloth is never napt; sometimes made with worsted warp
and woolen weft. Name a variant of Cashmere.

=Cassinette=—an inferior coarse fabric, similar to union cassimere (qv),
used in the cheaper grades of men’s clothing.

=Cassock=—(1) a plain, close-fitting garment, reaching to the feet, the
distinctiv dress of clerics indoors and out, worn with and without
vestments, often with a sash; the color is black for priests, purple for
bishops, red for cardinals, the pope alone wears white; (2) a similar
garment worn by Anglican clergy when officiating; (3) a short, loose
jacket worn under the Geneva gown by Presbyterian ministers; (4) a
military cloak; (5) a name some times given to the single-breasted
clerical frock coat with closed-throat military collar.

=Cassock bands=—see Bands (2).

=Cassock vest=—a clerical waistcoat without opening in front, closing on
the side, and with a short military collar.

=Cast knitting=—a variety of k. in which the needles are thrust from the
inside while the yarn is held on the outside of the fabric or article
that is being made.

=Cast-off=—wornout or discarded clothes we don’t want.

=Cast-off buckle=—a suspender b. that permits a separation of the end
strap from the webbing as a toilet convenience for lazy persons.

=Castor=—see C. beaver.

=Castor=—a shade of gray.

=Castor=—(1) a general term for light-weight gloves of any leather from
which the grain is removed, commonly gray or drab in color; (2) one of
several terms for ooze kid.

=Castor beaver=—a heavy milled, face finisht, all-wool cloth, a little
lighter in weight than ordinary beaver (qv); used for overcoats, etc.

=Castor Francaise=—a long-haired felt used by hatters; and hats of same.

=Cat=—a night prowling animal whose hide, after its ninth death, becomes
sealskin, etc.

=Cat o’ nine tails=—a multi-thonged whip or scourge sometimes worn out
on bad boys, et al.

=Catalog=—a book or pamphlet listing wares of sale; in widest use as a
publication for the special benefit of mail order customers.

=Catcher’s mask=—a guard for the face; constructed of wire and leather,
worn as a protection against pitched and foul balls, the batter’s bat,
etc.

=Catcher’s mitten=—a very large, heavily padded leather glove or pillow
on which the pitcht balls are received by the catcher, so contrived as
to hold the ball and save a home run.

=Catching mitt=—see Catcher’s gloves and C. mitten.

=Cats-and-dogs=—trade term for a miscellaneous collection of merchandise
of more or less doubtful value.

=Cathedral beard=—a broad, spreading, square cut b., “so called because
men of the church did wear it”.

=Cavalier cape=—familiar term for evening dress cloak and by extension
for the Inverness overcoat.

=Cavalry uniform=—see Full dress, Dress u., Service u., Fatigue u., et
var.

=Cellular cloth=—broadly, any c. more or less loosely woven,
characterized by cell-like meshes or openness.

=Celluloid=—a chemical substance consisting largely of cellulose and
camphor, manufactured in imitation of linen, amber, shell, ivory, etc.

=Celluloid collars=—c. that need never go to a laundry and should never
go near to a fire; c. cuffs ditto; worn largely by workingmen who could
just as well do without them.

=Cemented seam=—trade term used in reference to s. fastened together by
a strip of rubber tissue or cement or other adhesiv, usually lapt, and
commonly stitcht, tho the stitching is sometimes omitted. Mostly used on
old-style mackintoshes.

=Cerement=—a garment, covering or wrapping for the dead; grave clothes.

=Ceremonial=—formal (as dress).

=Cerevis=—a small cylindrical cap, usually with a society, or corps
monogram, worn by students in German universities.

=C. G.=—trade diminutiv for the balbriggan and lisle thread hosiery and
underwear manufactured by C. & G. Bonbon et Cie., Troyes, France.

=Chain=—warp.

=Chain hole=—a vertical buttonhole in a waistcoat, from which the
watchchain is suspended.

=Chain stitch=—an ornamental s. formed by carrying the thread thru
repeated slip loops, easily pulled out by pulling the underthread;
sometimes used for basting.

=Chain-weave serge=—trade term for s., so woven as to resemble chains
laying close together diagonally, clear finisht and piece dyed (qv);
also called double corkscrew.

=Chain-weave worsted=—see C.-w. serge.

=Chalk=—loosely, any substance used by tailors for drafting patterns and
marking cloth.

=Chalk stripes=—trade term for fabrics having white stripes on a dark
ground, as serges, unfinishts, etc.

=Chambray=—a fine quality of gingham, plain colored, woven of very fine
count cotton yarns, the warp and weft usually of different colors, with
a linen finish.

=Chamois=—a soft, pliable leather, originally prepared from the skin of
the c. goat, used for gloves, garment interlining, chest protectors,
pockets, window cleaning, etc.

=Chamois fiber=—name given to a stout crinkled paper fabric used as an
interlining, for chest protectors, etc.

=Chamois pocket=—a p. in trousers, waistcoat or other garment, chamois
lined.

=Championship belt=—usually a most gorgeous affair competed for by
pugilists.

=Change pocket=—a small p. for small change, usually placed on the right
side of coats, either above or within the regular p. on that side, and
occasionally, in overcoats, on the inside facing of the left side; also
called ticket p.

=Changeant=—changeable; an effect in weaving obtained by employing both
warp and weft, composed of two strands of different colors, the
changeable colors being an effect of light-play, according as viewed.

=Changey-for-changey=—(nautical) an expression used in relation to a
“swap”, denoting that each party is satisfied with his bargain.

=Channel=—in shoemaking, the groove or gutter along the edges of the
sole wherein are the stitches holding sole and other parts together.

=Chap money=—English provincialism for a rebate allowed by a dealer for
spot cash payment.

=Chaparejos=—strong leather breeches or overalls to protect the legs
from trees and brush while riding; worn by cowboys on the plains and by
them commonly abbreviated to “chaps”.

=Chaparro=—see Chaparejos.

=Chape=—(1) the metal tip of a scabbard; (2) a catch or loop.

=Chapeau=—a hat; especially, a plumed or military hat.

=Chapeau=—(=navy=) a rigid cockt hat of black silk beaver, 16 to 18 in.
from peak to peak, 5–5½ in. high on left fan, 4–4½ in. high on right
fan. For the admiral of the navy, to have in the fold at each end a
tassel of 5 gold bullions underlaid by 5 blue bullions; a strip of 2 in.
gold lace laid on flat around the outer rims of the fans, passing under
the peaks; on the right fan a 3¾ in. black silk cockade with a loop of
1½ in. gold lace over it, fastened with a large size navy button, the
ends of the loop being carried over the rim; for rear admirals, the same
but with a 1½ in. strip of gold lace around the outer rims; for other
commissioned officers except chaplains, chief boatswains, chief gunners,
chief carpenters and chief sailmakers, the same, but with a strip of
black silk 2½ in. wide around the rims, in lieu of gold lace, laid on
half-and-half; (=Army=) similar, according to pattern in offices of
quartermaster general; to be worn with the peak front turned slightly to
the left, showing the gilt ornaments upon the right side; (=Marine
corps=) of black silk plush, curved pattern, same as prescribed for
general officers of the army, except that both sides shall be 5 in.
high, with an embroidered gold lace ornament on the right side
surmounted with a marine corps cap ornament and a large marine corps
button, a gold wire tassel in front and rear peak, and a plume of canary
colored cock feathers for major general commandant; for all staff
officers (optional) the same, except that the plume is of red cock
feathers. This chapeau may be worn with special full dress and full
dress in place of cap for indoor occasions when desired; never to be
worn when mounted. (=Revenue cutter service=) a rigid or folding chapeau
of black silk beaver, of same dimensions as prescribed for the navy, the
rims bound with black silk lace 2½ in. wide, showing half-and-half; on
the right fan a black silk cockade 3¾ in., over which is a strip of gold
lace fastened with a revenue service button, a tassel of 3 gold and 3
blue bullions in each peak.

=Chapeau bras=—a soft, three-cornered dress hat that can be folded and
carried under the arm, worn commonly in the 18th century and still by
officers in the U. S. navy.

=Chapeau de poil=—a beaver or felt hat.

=Chapka=—(Bohemian) a sort of mortarboard hat, part of the Lanciers
uniform.

=Chaplain’s evening dress coat=—(=navy=) see Evening d. c.

=Chaplain’s evening dress waistcoat=—(=navy=) see Evening d. w.

=Chaplain’s full dress coat=—(=army=) a single-breasted frock c. of
black cloth with standing collar, fastening with 9 black silk buttons;
no ornaments.

=Chaplain’s frock coat=—(=navy=) a single-breasted f. c. of dark blue
cloth, buttoning to the neck, with one row of 7 flat black silk buttons
and plain standing collar on which is embroidered in silver a Latin
cross, and on the sleeves rows of black braid according to rank.

=Chaplain’s hat=—(=army=) with full dress and dress uniforms, a black
felt h., similar to the service h. (qv) with a cord of gold bullion and
black silk intermixt.

=Chaplain’s mess jacket=—(=navy=) see Mess j.

=Chaplain’s undress waistcoat=—(=navy=) see Undress w.

=Chaplain’s vestments=—(=army and navy=) while conducting services the
chaplain may wear the v. of the church to which he belongs.

=Chaplain’s white service coat=—(=navy=) same as w. s. c. (qv), but with
white buttons.

=Chaplet=—a wreath or garland for the head—worn only in pictures from
mythology; perhaps, by certain of the illuminati of the very ancient
past; and by the near-actors in certain frivolous and unclassifiable
theatrical productions of latter times.

=Chapman=—a peddler of trifles or cheap small wares.

=Chappau=—a sort of coat or tunic of silk or woolen cloth worn by the
Uzbek Tartars, beneath an overgarment of woolen cloth.

=Chaps=—see Chaparejos.

=Character wig=—(theatrical) any w. designed to help delinat the
character portrayed.

=Charge account=—a soft snap for papa’s boy.

=Charges prepaid=—supposed to be an inducement for orders; but analysis
of inventory statements shows that the buyer always stands it.

=Chasuble=—a sleeveless mantle falling low in front and behind, with a
cross on the back; worn by Latin, Greek and Anglican priests; the
principal vestment regarded as strictly sacerdotal or sacrificial.

=Chauffeur’s livery=—see Appendix.

=Chauffeur’s sack coat=—same as Norfolk jacket, but with turned down
collar and military closed neck.

=Chauffeur’s suit=—any s. designed for service wear of the automobile
operator.

=Chausse=—the early name for drawers.

=Cheap tailor=—one who makes, or claims to make, clothes to order at
prices as low as and often much lower than readymade garments may be
obtained for. Garments made by such tailors are usually made under
practically the same conditions as readymade—by machinery and by
operators instead of by journeymen tailors and hand work; the main
difference being that each order is cut separately instead of several
garments being cut at one time as in readymade. Unless the “cheap
tailor” has facilities for obtaining his cloths and other materials
direct from the mills, as have readymaders, and has a large business to
take care of such necessarily large purchases, there are no other
advantages, as he must then buy thru jobbers, in small lots at higher
prices. Because of much fraud and deceit in connection with cheap
tailoring in the past, the “cheap tailor” is not always highly regarded,
tho there are many inexpensiv tailors enjoying the requisit facilities,
who have built-up large businesses by fair and square dealing.

=Check—in= weaving a design produced by different colors crossing at
right angles forming small squares.

=Check kersey=—one of the old names for k.

=Cheeks=—an old sobriquet for a marine, derived from a rough pun on his
uniform in the olden days.

=Cheese=—familiar term for c. press block (qv).

=Cheese cloth=—a thin, sleezy, loosely woven, unbleacht or bleacht
cotton fabric, used chiefly (in men’s wear) as a covering for padding
and garment interlining; also, shellackt, to give body to silk hats and
the like.

=Cheese press block=—a half circular segment of seasoned hardwood, about
3 × 12 × 18 inches, used by tailors for pressing seams, lapels, edges,
etc.

=Chest=—the part of the body enclosed by the ribs and the breastbone.

=Chest=—a wooden box for holding clothes and other personal property.

=Chest measure=—a standard of sizing by which readymade clothes, shirts,
etc., are bought and sold.

=Chest protector=—an undergarment of felt, wool, chamois or paper fiber,
worn under the dress shirt for extra protection in cold weather;
vulgarly “liver pad”.

=Chester=—colloquial English for top coat; abbreviation of Chesterfield
(?).

=Chester jacket=—a single-breasted sack coat similar to a Norfolk.

=Chesterfield=—(1) a single-breasted, fly-front overcoat, of medium
length, having a plain back with or without a center seam; (2) also a
single-breasted cutaway frock coat for stout men, usually made with 4
buttons, the top one only used.

=Chesty=—full chested; pigeon breasted.

=Cheval glass=—a long mirror, revealing the entire person, much employed
by those who think themselves good to look upon.

=Cheviot=—originally a rough, twill woven, slightly fulled fabric, with
shaggy nap, woven from the coarse strong wool of the c. sheep, whence
name; more generally any rough-finisht, twill woven fabric of strong,
coarse wool, thoroly fulled, either with rough (or open) or close finish
(long or short nap), used as suiting and overcoating.

=Cheviot shirting=—a heavy, plain or twilled, soft finisht cotton
fabric, woven of single-thread warp and weft sufficiently coarse to
produce weight, usually with loom-produced patterns such as small checks
and stripes.

=Chevreau=—(glove term) real kid, fed only by the mother, never having
browsed. Compare Chevrette.

=Chevrette=—(glove term) kid older than chevreau (qv), having eaten
other foods, as grass, etc., the skins being consequently harder and
tougher.

=Chevron=—in weaving, a pattern characterized by zigzag lines or
stripes; herringbone.

=Chevron=—(1) a device, consisting of two or more bars meeting at an
angle, worn on the sleeve by non-commissioned officers to indicate rank;
(2) an heraldic device.

=Chicken skin=—a material once actually used for gloves and fans, but
now quite unused for such purposes—not, indeed, that the creatures have
been cultivated into any greater tenderness nowadays.

=Chimere=—a gown worn by Anglican bishops.

=Chimneypot=—a tall or top hat, usually applied to those of felt.

=Chin clout=—a muffler.

=Chin latch=—a small cloth strap to fasten together the turned-up collar
of an overcoat or ulster; fastened by means of buttons and buttonholes.

=Chin lines=—whiskers.

=Chin stay=—see C. strap.

=Chin strap=—a band passing under the chin for holding on a cap or hat;
an extendible s. attacht to uniform caps, usually worn closed on the
upper side of visor, or in the case of shakos, falling loosely in front
of, but not under the chin.

=Chin tuft=—a wee beard; a goatee or imperial.

=China silk=—a light, thin, plain woven silk fabric; pongee.

=Chinchilla=—general term for heavy, double-woven woolen fabrics, having
a long-napt surface of wooly lobs (or tufted nap) of various forms and
effects, but not in imitation of chinchilla fur, as is generally
supposed. See Petersham.

=Chinchilla=—an animal of the weazel family, found in Peru and Bolivia,
prized for its soft, gray, silky fur.

=Chinchilla machine=—a machine for forming the peculiar knobby nap of
chinchilla cloth.

=Chine=—an effect in weaving produced by employing warp threads that
have been printed and groupt in such manner as to form more or less
distinct patterns when woven; most frequently seen in silks, such as
taffetas.

=Chinese grass=—see Ramie.

=Chink=—the slant-eyed dopefiend who declares your shirts are not ready
because you didn’t call for them yesterday.

=Chinkers=—cant for handcuffs united by a chain.

=Chip=—trade term for tiny diamond specks used in cheap jewelry. See
Rose cutting.

=Chipping Norton=—see Bliss tweeds.

=Chirothecae=—a form of glove worn by the ancient Romans, fingerless and
resembling the modern mitten. See Digitalia.

=Chiton=—a sort of short, sleeveless tunic, worn by the ancient Greeks.

=Chlamys=—a variety of himation (qv).

=Chlorine=—Cl_{2}; one of the most activ bleaching agents.

=Chloroform=—CHCl_(3); a good agent for the removal of grease spots from
clothing.

=Choice=—see Wool.

=Choiling=—cutlery term for the operation of filing the little nick in a
blade just between the cutting edge and the tang.

=Choir vestments=—see Cassock, Cotta, Surplice, etc.

=Choked bellows=—an underlaying accordion plait around a pocket (usually
of the patcht variety) for purposes of increast capacity. See Bellows
pocket.

=Choker=—any tall (and uncomfortable) shirt collar, especially a plain
standing collar.

=Chopper=—in tailoring establishments a man who lays the paper patterns
made by the “cutter” on to the cloth, marks same, and “chops” or cuts
the cloth. Compare Cutter.

=Chopper=—a heavy leather working glove or mitten.

=Chorus shirt=—see Ballet s.

=Chrome kid=—goat skins tanned and finisht by the salts of aluminum or
chromic acid method. See Vici k.

=Chuddah=—(1) a fine wool shawl made in India; (2) also the wool of
which it is made.

=Church-of-England hat=—a low, round-crowned, felt h. with plain, flat
brim, sometimes (erroneously) called shovel h. (qv).

=Cigar case=—a leather or metal pocket c. for cigars.

=Cigar magazine=—(1) same as c. case; also (2) a humidor.

=Cigaret case=—a metal pocket c. for coffin nails.

=Cimeter=—see Scimitar.

=Cinch=—a belt.

=Cincture=—a clerical girdle of serge or other stuff with silk fringed
ends.

=Circular cape=—any c. the outer edges of which, spread flat, conform to
the shape of a circle, and generally understood to mean without shaping
at the shoulders.

=Civet=—the glandular secretion of the civet cat, most repulsiv and
disgusting in its original state, but, properly compounded, practically
indispensable in the imitation of certain floral perfumes.

=Civilian dress=—distinguishes our everydayness from army and navy
magnificence.

=Clad=—clothed.

=Clan tartan=—any and all of the plaids of the various highland clans of
Scotland.

=Claque=—a sort of semi-circle of felt, which it was the fashion in
France, in the early part of the last century, to carry under the arm
instead of wearing it on the head.

=Clasp=—a ball-and-socket glove fastener. See Snaps.

=Class chevron=—(=navy=) angled stripes of scarlet cloth forming part of
the rating badge (qv) indicating rank of the wearer.

=Classy=—a term often used by misfit shops and cheap “gents’ furnishers”
as implying some aristocratic distinction.

=Clatty=—dishevelled; untidy.

=Claudent=—a readymade scarf or plastron tied like an ascot or puff, but
without fullness and flat as a pancake.

=Clawhammer=—see Evening dress.

=Clay=—a name given to serges, worsteds and diagonals woven after the
process of J. & B. Clay, of Huddersfield, England.

=Clay worsted=—see above and Worsted.

=Clean=—well made; of good quality, texture, lines, styles, workmanship,
etc.

=Clear finish=—trade term for worsted cloths from which all nap or fuzz
has been removed, as serge, “hard finish” worsteds, etc.

=Clearing sale=—the effort made by one merchant to show how much cheaper
he is than the other fellow.

=Clerical cape overcoat=—similar to an Inverness o., the cape buttoning
in front.

=Clerical collar=—(1) a coat and waistcoat c., straight standing, not
turned over, similar to that known as military c. (qv); on the
waistcoat, however, the clerical c. buttons behind and has a continuous
front; (2) a separable linen shirt c. closed in front and buttoning
behind, the Anglican c. being single and the Roman double or folded.

=Clerical frock coat=—a single-breasted frock c. with straight skirts
(not cutaway), buttoned from waist line to throat, usually with 7
buttons, with military collar.

=Clerical full dress=—as worn by Anglican clergymen, consists of a sort
of single-breasted cutaway frock coat without revers, buttoning to the
throat, with a military collar; a cassock waistcoat and plain trousers.

=Clerical girdle=—a sort of cincture of black or white worsted or silk
rope with tasseled ends.

=Clerical sack coat=—a square-cornered single-breasted s. c., without
revers, usually with 6 buttons, closing to the throat, with military
collar.

=Clerical shirt=—a plain white linen s. without a made bosom, but with a
simple placket.

=Clerical shirt collar=—see Clerical c. (2).

=Clericals=—short, close-cropt side whiskers.

=Clerk=—an absolutely impeccable individual.

=Cleveland hat=—a white or light-colored felt h., shaped like the silk
top h., popular during the first Cleveland administration.

=Clip=—a season’s “crop” of wool; a shearing. See Wool c.

=Clips=—waste bits of cloth and other materials, saved and sold to
converters.

=Cloak=—a loose outergarment without sleeves; a cape.

=Cloak room=—a shuffling place for umbrellas, hats, overcoats and
rubbers.

=Cloaking=—any fabric suitable for men’s or women’s cloaks or overcoats,
such as kersey, broadcloths, beaver, vicuna, chinchilla, etc.

=Clock=—narrow stem of silk embroidery on either side of a stocking,
extending beyond the ankle and ending in a spear or crowsfoot; also a
similar effect in drawn work.

=Clockmutch=—a night cap, from the Dutch clapmuts; a form of headdress
which, tho still worn in Holland, is rarely seen in America.

=Clodhopper=—an awkward, clumsy fellow.

=Clodhoppers=—(1)extra large, ill-fitting shoes; (2) big feet.

=Clog=—(1) a dancing shoe; (2) an overshoe.

=Clogs=—wooden soles, usually iron shod, with leather straps for
fastening.

=Close edge=—see Scotch e.

=Close-fitting=—said of a coat or other garment made tight or snug
fitting, or shaped closely to the body.

=Close-roll=—trade term for umbrellas constructed on metal rods and
covered with fine silk or other material that will roll closely into
small compass. See Tight r.

=Closed front=—see Meeting folder.

=Closed gauntlet=—a mailed protectiv covering for the hand and wrist
with immovable fingers, with the exception of one joint, so that in the
shock of meeting an adversary, the weapon of the wearer, held fast in
the fixt fingers, might not be dropt out of the hand—a device which, in
the tournaments of those days, was considered as giving an unfair
advantage over one’s adversary, and was usually proscribed.

=Closed shop=—a s. where a workman who refuses to join a labor union
cannot find employment.

=Closed trousers=—tailors’ term for t. made for customers who stand with
their legs close together, the inseam being shorter than is required for
open t., which see.

=Closers=—in ready-to-wear clothing manufacture, operators who put
together the sides, back and front seams of a coat, making the outer
shell only.

=Closing measure=—in tailoring a measure taken over the shoulder from
front to rear of sleeve head at under-level of arm scye. Compare Scye m.

=Cloth=—in the woolens trade, a word used generally, to distinguish
close-woven, fulled and milled or napt fabrics made of woolen yarn from
those made of worsted yarns in various fancy weaves and not compacted
but given various finishes, as “clear”, “unfinisht”, etc.

=Cloth beam=—in a loom a roller or b. on which the woven fabric is
wound.

=Cloth board=—a piece of wood on which bolts of woolens, linings,
shirtings, etc., are wound into bolts; also made of heavy paper pulp b.,
and wood-and-paper.

=Cloth brush=—name commonly given to a b. of bristles set in a wooden
back, to distinguish from whisk broom, altho the latter is often so
called.

=Cloth button=—a b. made on a mold and covered with cloth matching the
garment.

=Cloth fair=—an English custom of the 17th century, annual exhibits and
sales being held by the weavers and factors.

=Cloth knife=—a very long tapering blade for cutting many layers of
material at a time, working in a groove in the cutting table.

=Cloth-lapper=—one who folds cloth in the piece, generally by means of
machinery.

=Cloth of gold=—generally heavy brocaded silk textures, inwrought with
gold threads. More precise information can be had with research—you
might commence with Deuteronomy xxxix. 3, and work up to the present.

=Cloth of iron=—see Iron c.

=Cloth-stitch=—a close s., like the weave of cloth.

=Cloth tester=—a machine for testing, from a small sample, the tensil
strength of fabrics.

=Cloth (the)=—the clergy.

=Cloth-teazeler=—a machine for raising a nop on cloth by teazeling.

=Clothes=—consult Baker’s “Dictionary of Men’s Wear”.

=Clothes hamper=—a basket for soiled clothes.

=Clothes line=—a rope on which washing is hung out to dry.

=Clothes press=—a closet for clothes; a wardrobe.

=Clothes tongs=—an implement for grappling cloths or garments and
removing them from a dying vat.

=Clothier=—(1) one who sells ready-to-wear clothing—distinguisht from
the tailor in that he usually gets his money in advance; (2) a
manufacturer of clothes.

=Clothing=—garments and apparel, considered as a whole.

=Clothing wool=—fine fleece 2 to 4 inches long, intended for woolen or
carded yarn, usually graded as picklock, XXX, XX, X, No. 1 and No. 2,
the first being the finest, the last the coarsest; the name of locality
where obtained is also prefixt. See Wool. Compare Combing w.

=Clouded yarn=—weft y., characterized by alternate thick and thin places
thruout its length.

=Cloudy=—trade term for goods not perfectly dyed and uneven in color.
Compare “Off color” and “Shaded”.

=Club=—a place for the idle rich to sit in the windows for the
inspection of pretty girls passing by.

=Club=—see Wig.

=Club check=—small quiet checks.

=Club coat=—see Dinner jacket.

=Club tie=—see Graduated t.

=Coaching hat=—a felt h. similar to a derby, but with a flat or square
top.

=Coachman’s box overcoat=—a double-breasted top coat, of covert, kersey
or whipcord, for wear with stable suit or undress livery.

=Coachman’s collar=—a standing shirt c. usually on a band and having
well rounded corners.

=Coachman’s frock coat=—a single-breasted skirted c. closing with six
buttons, usually matching the metalwork of the harness, large pocket
flaps at waistline without pockets, four buttons on skirt.

=Coachman’s hat=—(1) a tall felt h. having a bell crown with a flat top;
(2) a variety of Derby h. with a flattish top.

=Coachman’s livery=—Dress: body coat, breeches and boots, silk hat,
greatcoat in winter. Undress: cutaway coat, breeches, square-crown derby
or bell-crown hat, leggins, selby or top coat in winter; jacket and
trousers often substituted for the skirted coat and breeches.

=Coachman’s overcoat=—a double-breasted frock o., buttoning close to the
neck with a double row of six buttons, Prussian collar, large pocket
flaps at waistline, the skirt folds showing turned back revers or side
edges (qv).

=Coachmen’s proof=—an extra heavy waterproofing process, as applied to
raincoatings, etc., intended for severe wear.

=Coat=—an outergarment for the upper part of the body as body c. (sack,
cutaway, frock, dress, etc.), and overcoat (top coat, Chesterfield,
Newmarket, paletot, raincoat, Inverness, ulster, etc.)

=Coat case=—see Portmanteau, Suit c., etc.

=Coat front=—trade term for a built-up stiffening or shape-retaining
interlining for the fronts of coats, made of stitcht layers of
haircloth, felt and canvas.

=Coat label=—(1) a l. of cotton or linen, usually sewed within the
inside breast pocket, containing besides the tailor’s name the name of
the customer, date and number of order; (2) a woven silk l. bearing the
name and address of the maker, usually sewed inside at back of neck.

=Coat link=—a pair of buttons linkt together, or a button and a loop,
used for closing or fastening a coat, as a dress coat.

=Coat maker=—a journeyman tailor who makes coats his specialty.

=Coat money=—a tax levied by Charles I. ostensibly for clothing the
army.

=Coat of mail=—defensiv armor worn by those afraid to die.

=Coat pad=—general term for any made-up padding or wadding, as
shoulder-pads, coat fronts, etc.

=Coat shirt=—a s. open all the way down the front and put on like a c.,
whence name.

=Coat sweater=—a knitted jacket or sweater (qv) opening all the way down
the front and closing with buttons; with sleeves, but usually without
collar, much like a cardigan jacket.

=Coat-tail pocket=—see Skirt p.

=Coat-tails=—the skirts of a frock c.

=Coatee=—(1) a very short coat of 1757; (2) a cadet’s uniform coat.

=Coating=—tailoring term for all fine woolen and worsted cloths
especially suitable for dress coats, such as broadcloth, crepe,
unfinisht worsted, vicuna, refines, etc.; also applied to overcoatings.

=Coatlet=—a dummy sample showing how a coat will look when made up; a
means of showing piece goods by swatches cut and finisht much like a
coat front, the effect being enhanced by displaying a number of such
dummies in an overlapping row. (Name and system proprietary.)

=Cobble=—to patch or repair boots or shoes; used in the sense of rough
or clumsy work.

=Cobbler=—(1) a mender of boots and shoes; (2) a clumsy or indifferent
workman.

=Cobweb=—unusually thin, sheer and transparent, as c. hosiery.

=Cochineal=—bug juice; a red dye.

=Cockade=—a roset or knot of ribbon, leather, bullion, etc., worn on the
hat as a badge of service, military, diplomatic or (improperly)
domestic, etc.

=Cocking=—tailor’s term for critical inspection of finisht garments for
discovery of mistakes—derived doubtless from an affected manner of
squinting or “cocking the eye” on the part of the zealous examiner.

=Cockle=—see below.

=Cockling=—trade term for a wrinkled, puckered or shriveled effect or
apparent defect in cloths, usually the result of lack of uniformity in
warp and filling yarns, or uneven twist of either or both, or imperfect
crabbing (qv), etc., chiefly encountered in light-weight fabrics and
especially in such styles as loom-checks, mixt warp suitings, etc.

=Cockt hat=—a h. of various shapes, sometimes turned up in front only,
with one button, and also with three laps, often richly trimmed with
metal cords, buttons, laces, ribbons, etc.; see Kevenhuller. See also
Chapeau. (=Cocked= h.)

=Cocoon=—the covering or chrysalis envelop spun by the silk worm, from
which the filaments entering into the manufacture of silk are obtained.

=C. O. D.=—collect on delivery—otherwise you could have a charge
account.

=Codfish=—the airs, frills and pretensions of the new rich; affected
stylishness.

=Codfish aristocracy=—the “smart set” that furnishes the market for
readymade ties, “pants,” “vests,” and outre “fashions” generally.

=Codpiece=—a medieval ornamental article of apparel. Consult Rabelais,
Boccaccio, et al.

=Coffin cloth=—see Casket c.

=Coif=—a close undercap—centuries out of date.

=Coin case=—a sort of purse for odd change.

=Coin purse=—a small p. for “loose change.”

=Coin toe=—one of many varieties of shoe toes, rounded, and according to
width, known as half dollar t., dime t., etc.

=Cokers=—iron reinforcements for the sole and heels of the woodsoled
clogs worn by European peasants; also known as “irons”.

=Cold storage=—recommended for furs; for processes, etc., consult
scientific works.

=Coldwater shrinking=—a process of sponging or shrinking woolens by
dipping them in cold water and then suspending them on rods or lines in
the open air to dry; the London process; the opposite of steam shrunk
(qv).

=Colichemarde=—a peculiar duelling sword of the period of Louis XIV.

=Collar=—in tailoring that part of a coat or waistcoat that is folded
back around the neck. All collars are either straight (put on in a
straight line) or horseshoe (hollowed and curved), the former being the
better fitting but more difficult to make. As to shape collars are known
as notched c., shawl c., ulster c., clerical c., Prussian c., military
c., rolling c., etc., while as to material they are designated self c.,
velvet c., laid on velvet c., inlaid c., etc. All of which see

=Collar=—a detacht or attacht linen neckpiece. See Shirt c.

=Collar-ascot=—a neglige c. and cravat combined, but separable.
(Proprietary term.)

=Collar bag=—a b. of cloth or leather, with a draw-string, for carrying
collars when traveling.

=Collar box=—a container for collars, usually of leather.

=Collar break=—tailoring term for the creased line of a lapel.

=Collar button=—an indispensable instrument of iniquitous proclivities.

=Collar city (the)=—Troy, N. Y.

=Collar insignia=—(=army=) see Insignia of rank.

=Collar spring=—a steel s. device worn under coat collars for the
purpose of keeping the coat front together without buttoning and for the
further purposes of spoiling the coat and to display the wearer’s
vulgarity.

=Collar stand=—tailoring term for that part of a coat c. where sewed to
the coat proper and extending to the crease or turnover point; usually
1⅛ to 1¾ inches in height.

=Collar velvet=—a very fine and expensive grade of silk v. made
especially for the tailoring trade.

=Collarette=—see Vestlet.

=Collars-and-cuffs=—nickname for the late Duke of Clarence, son of King
Edward VII., arising from his penchant for extremely high collars and
protrusive cuffs.

=College cap=—an adhesive diminutive c. of about the size of a small
saucer.

=College colors=—flamboyance. See Appendix.

=College hat=—a flat topt soft felt h. of the telescope variety, usually
with band in college colors, commonly worn with brim blazed up or banged
down in front.

=Collet=—a shoulder cape or collar.

=Collet=—the neck or stem of a button.

=Collet point=—the sharp point or base of a brilliant cut diamond.

=Cologne=—see Eau de c.

=Colonel’s uniform=—(=army=) see Full dress, Dress u., White u., Service
u.; (=marine corps=) Special full dress, Full dress, Mess dress,
Undress, Field dress. Also variations.

=Color=—briefly, any hue, as distinguisht from white. See Encyclopedia.

=Color doctor=—in calico printing, a blade for wiping surplus ink from
the engraved roll.

=Color of the day=—in ecclesiastical usage the vestments worn on certain
days must be of certain colors, as: white, for the feasts of our Lord,
of virgins who were not martyrs, and of confessors; red for feasts of
Pentecost and of all martyrs; violet for advent and from Septuagesima
until Easter; green for ferial or ordinary days; black on Good Friday
and in services for the dead. Cloth of gold is supposed to take the
place of white, red or green.

=Color-test=—general term for the various means of determining the
purity or fastness of colors, which may be by means of exposure,
washing, chemical processes, etc. See Acid t., Exposure t., and an
encyclopedia.

=Comb=—a little rake of rubber, horn, celluloid or other substance used
in dressing the hair.

=Combination suit=—undershirt and drawers constructed as one piece or
garment; better known as union s.

=Combing=—the process of arranging the fibers of wool, mohair, silk,
cotton, etc., into a parallel condition and of equal length, preparatory
to spinning into smooth, even and regular yarn; the perfected
application of the carding principle.

=Combing wool=—fleece intended for worsted yarn, the staple ranging from
4 to 10 inches long; generally classed as fine, medium, coarse and low.
See Wool. Compare Carding w.

=Come again=—shopkeeper’s invitation to try it over again.

=Come-back=—a customer, not sold to the first time, who returns.

=Come-to-Jesus-collar=—irreverent term for a plain standing linen shirt
c. of the lap front variety; a “choker”; a clergyman’s c.

=Comforter=—a long woolen scarf or muffler.

=Comforter=—a quilt or counterpane, especially one of cotton or wool
filling between two sheets of cotton or silk, more or less fancifully
stitched.

=Comfortable=—a sort of shawl worn in the first half of the last
century.

=Commander’s coat=—(=masonic=) a double-breasted frock c. of black
cloth, having two rows of 11 buttons each and a standing military collar
and epaulets. Compare Sir Knights c. and Fatigue blouse.

=Commander’s uniform=—(=navy=) see Special full dress, Full dress,
Dress, Service dress, Evening dress, Mess dress, Undress. See also
variations.

=Comme il faut=—irreproachable.

=Commercially all-wool=—see All wool.

=Commodore’s uniform=—see Special full dress, Full dress, Dress, Service
dress, Evening dress, Mess dress, Undress. See also variations.

=Common=—see Wool.

=Commonsense=—a name sometimes applied to designate a certain style of
broad-toed footform shoe. See Orthopedic.

=Competition=—a good thing to take the conceit out of some merchants.

=Composition cloth=—a strong, heavy cotton duck or canvas, chemically
waterproofed, used for trunk covers, bags, etc.

=Compound spectacles=—(1) s. having lenses made of two different foci or
characters in one frame; (2) s. with supplementary (detachable) lenses
of colored glass. Compare Bifocal s.

=Concertina pocket=—a bellows (patch) p.

=Conchas=—Silver ornaments attached to the spurs worn by cowboys and
plainsmen on high days and holiday occasions.

=Conditioning=—a process in the manufacture of cotton yarns, restoring
thereto, immediately after spinning, the natural moisture that was
driven out. Originally the purpose was to add weight and deceive the
purchaser, but experience, in comparison with yarns “hot off the reel”,
has demonstrated that conditioned yarns are improved materially in
strength, elasticity and appearance, with freedom from kinks and curls.

=Conductors’ uniforms=—see Railroad c. u. and Street railway c. u.

=Coner=—a workman who attends to a cone on which hat bodies are formed.

=Coney=—a species of rabbit, the fur of which is largely used in the
manufacture of fur garments, and by hatters; properly the fur of the
conepatus, a genus of badger-like skunks; loosely applied to all cheap
furs, such as rabbit, cat, etc.

=Confessional cape=—a c. worn by Catholic priests in the confessional
box; not much in present use.

=Confirm=—to ratify an order given—a practice that seems to be growing
in usage.

=Conformateur=—a mechanical device for obtaining and recording or
holding the shape of the head or of other parts of the body that hats or
other articles of apparel may be conformed thereto.

=Congress shoe=—a s. without a buttoned or laced opening in the front of
top, but with elastic gores in the sides.

=Coning=—in hat making the process of shaping the flat felt into cones.

=Connaught=—an overcoat of the same class as the present day
Chesterfield, popular in England about 25 years ago.

=Continental hat=—the distinctiv h., so called, worn by the Continental
Army of old, but which dates back to the time of William III. See Three
cornered h.

=Contract=—(1) a binding legal agreement insisted upon by employes not
confident of holding their jobs otherwise, and proffered by employers
not confident of holding good men otherwise; (2) an agreement for
merchandise or other services.

=Contraptions=—vulgarism applied to any new-fangled, peculiar thing or
idea; e. g., an extravagant form of dress, a queer and unusual manner of
speech, or anything else that is new and to which the public taste is
not accustomed.

=Cope=—a long mantle of silk or brocade worn over the alb by priests or
bishops on solemn or ceremonial occasions; also a state or choral
vestment worn by laymen.

=Copper toed=—name given to the old-time schoolboy’s shoes with copper
toe protection against scuffing.

=Cops=—the conical rolls of thread formed on the spindle of a spinning
machine.

=Cor de soie=—a corded silk of the 18th century.

=Cord stitch=—a fancy s. of a chain-like nature.

=Corded edge=—in tailoring an edge finish obtained by laying a cord
along the joint and fastening it thereto so as to present a hard-wearing
e.; see piped e. Differing from corded welt in that the cord is not
concealed but is on the outer edge or surface.

=Corded goods=—trade term for such goods as Bedford cord, whipcord,
repps, ottoman, etc.

=Corded pocket=—same as jetted p. (qv), especially if the turned over
piece encloses a cord.

=Corded seam=—a plain s. (qv) is first made, then instead of being
presst open, the s. is turned to one side and stitcht thru again so that
the face of the cloth shows a row of stitching, corresponding, usually,
with the edge finish. The three thicknesses give a cord effect to the
s., hence the name, altho it is also called “single-stitch s.” Also sewn
with a cord or piping between so as to show same on the outside. See C.
edge.

=Corded wolf’s paw=—see Wig.

=Cordington=—a heavy, close-felted variety of “niggerhead”. See also
Petersham.

=Cordonnet=—inferior silk fibers used for manufacturing braids, binding,
twist, etc.

=Cordovan=—horsehide shoe leather.

=Corduroy=—a heavy, pile-woven cotton fabric largely used for hunting
garments, stable wear, laborer’s clothes, etc.; usually 27 inches wide.
In weaving one or two sets of weft may be used (the latter for the
better grades), the weft forming the pile which is thrown up in furrows
of loops which are afterward cut and singed, and the cloth then dyed.

=Cordwainer=—a shoemaker.

=Cork sole=—shoemaking term for an intermediate s. of cork for warmth
and protection against wet.

=Corkscrew worsted=—a twill woven suiting having a round, even twill,
supposed to, but not suggesting the twists of a corkscrew, formed by the
warp surrounding and imbedding the weft and appearing on both face and
back of the fabric.

=Corner pocket=—same as top p.

=Coronation cloth=—a black-and-red variation of Queen’s mourning c.,
(qv) appearing just previous to the first time set for coronation of
King Edward VII.

=Coronet=—an article of decorativ attire not popular in democratic
America, tho in activ demand by heiresses of peddlers, packers, etc.

=Corporal’s uniform=—see Full dress, Dress u., White u., Service u.,
Fatigue u. Also variants.

=Corpulent=—trade term for a man whose waist and breast are more than
normal measure; i. e., a man whose chest seems to have slipt down below
his belt. See Stout.

=Corselet=—medieval armor.

=Corset=—contraption of cloth, steel and whalebone for giving
shapeliness to a woman or effeminacy to a man.

=Corset vest=—a vest (waistcoat) cut snug and tight to compress the
waist and strongly constructed to withstand the strain.

=Cosmetique=—same as Pomatum.

=Cossacks=—a peculiar shapeless sort of trousers reaching about to the
ankle where they are drawn with a ribbon and tied, rather full below the
waist where they are gathered by plaits to shape; popular in first half
of 19th century. Also called Plaited trousers.

=Cost-mark=—the first thing, not comprehended in his duties, that the
new employe takes an activ interest in learning.

=Coster suit=—general term for anything garish and cockneyfied.

=Costume=—(1) dress and the science and history of dress; (2) the
garments one may be wearing.

=Costume de rigueur=—extreme formal or evening dress; prescribed
ceremonious attire.

=Costumer=—one who furnishes garments of any particular period or
fashion for theatrical use, masquerades, etc.

=Costumer=—a piece of furniture upon which clothes are hung at night.

=Costumic=—of or pertaining to costume (rare).

=Cotta=—a short surplice, with and without sleeves.

=Cottes noir=—“black coats”, the nickname of a corps of mercenary German
troops of the early 17th century, whose appointments were black thruout.

=Cotton=—the soft, wooly fleece or down from the seed boll of the
c.-plant. How interesting are the encyclopedias! Look it up.

=Cotton-bale=—a bundle of about 500 lbs., in dimension 54 × 27 × 27
inches.

=Cotton bengaline=—silk b. with cotton warp.

=Cotton cheat=—term used by righteous factors in denunciation of
mercerized woolen and worsted fabrics.

=Cotton classification=—the New York commercial classification is (1)
full grades: fair, middling fair, good middling, middling, low middling,
good ordinary, ordinary; (2) half grades are designated by the prefix
“strict”; (3) quarter grades by the prefix “barely”, meaning a point
above half grade and the next full grade above, and “fully”, meaning a
point between half grade and the next full grade below. Liverpool high
grades are higher and low grades lower than those of New York.
Classifications for length are short staple (under 25 mm.), medium (25
to 30 mm.), long (30 to 40 mm.), and extra (40 mm. or more).

=Cotton gin=—a machine for separating the seeds from the fiber of
cotton.

=Cotton test=—if silk or wool suspected of containing cotton, light a
specimen by match; if adulterated will burn until consumed; the more
common test for wool is by boiling in caustic soda. See Breaking t.,
Burning t., Oil t., Sulfuric acid t., Thru-lighting t., Untwisting t.,
Acid t. There are also microscopic and other tests. See an encyclopedia.

=Cotton velvet=—velveteen.

=Cotton warp=—trade term for suitings and other cloths woven with a warp
of cotton and with filling of woolen or worsted.

=Cotton worsted=—stout all-cotton or part-cotton worsted-wove suitings
for men’s wear in imitation of honester goods, usually of hard, slippery
feel and the despair of the workman who has to “chop” it with shears.
See Cottonade; also Manipulated.

=Cottonade=—stout cotton cloth woven in imitation of woolen or worsted
trouserings, produced of coarse yarns, the patterns executed in the
loom; usually narrow width.

=Cottonette=—an elastic knitted cotton fabric employed for bathing
suits.

=Cotts=—see Cotty wool.

=Cotty wool=—the poor fleece of sheep exposed to severe weather or
inadequately fed; generally hard, brittle, matted and of little value.

=Cotul=—a moss grown on the rocks in several British isles: basis of the
brown dye used in coloring Harris tweeds.

=Count=—in spinning, the number given to any thread or yard (except
silk) to indicate its relativ fineness, based on the number of threads
required to weigh one pound. See Spinning; also see an encyclopedia.

=Counter=—a peculiarly shaped piece of sole leather used for stiffening
or supporting that part of the upper of a shoe immediately around the
heel.

=Counterhopper=—a too familiar term for salesclerks in retail shops.

=Counter jumper=—same thing.

=Counterpane=—a coverlet or quilt.

=Counting glass=—a magnifying glass for counting threads, twills, etc.,
of a fixed focus with an aperture of definit dimensions to serve as a
multiple.

=Court coat=—(1) a formal dress c. in European use; resembles c. in
vogue in the days of the Georges; cut somewhat like a “cutaway”, with
standing collar, deep pocket flaps, braided frogs instead of buttons,
braided edges; (2) a house footman’s c.

=Court dress=—(England) velvet tailcoat with steel buttons, silk
waistcoat, velvet knee breeches, black silk stockings, buckled low shoes
and white gloves, a cockt hat carried under the arm and a small dress
sword worn at the side.

=Court livery=—c. coat, silk or satin knee breeches, plush waistcoat,
silk stockings, buckled low shoes.

=Court plaster=—silk or cotton gummed with an antiseptic or healing
compound, useful after a scrap; originally worn by court ladies in the
shape of beauty patches (and pimple hiders?).

=Court tie=—a low shoe with short vamp; a sort of pump.

=Coutil=—a closely woven cotton fabric with a fine herringbone twill,
slightly resembling jean, used for corsets. (Included herein because
some men wear ’em.) (=Coutille=).

=Cover coat=—a top c.; a covert c.

=Covered button=—general term for coat, waistcoat and overcoat buttons
made on a wooden or metal mold and covered with silk braid, mohair,
lasting, cloth, etc., which see under those names.

=Coverlet=—an outer covering for a bed; a quilt.

=Covert cloth=—a stout twill woven woolen coating, the warp of which is
of two twisted yarns of differing colors with a single weft of the same
color as the dark strand of warp, producing a pepper-and-salt or mixt
effect in the piece, well fulled and sheared according as a smooth or
twilled surface is to result. Low grade coverts are sometimes woven with
a cotton-and-wool or all-cotton warp.

=Covert coat=—a short top c., properly of covert cloth.

=Couverture pantaloons=—a cloth or rubber lap robe for motoring wear,
convertible into over trousers by means of bands, hooks and buttons.

=Cow seal=—trade term for leather made from cowhides stamped in
imitation of seal leather but with a large, coarse grain. Compare Pin s.

=Cow-tail=—see Tail.

=Cowboy boots=—b. of fine stout calfskin, the legs of which are
decorated with fancy lines and curves stitcht into the leather, and
having heels at least 2 inches high curving inwardly with a very small
bottom, not as a matter of vanity or daintiness, but as a check against
the foot slipping thru the stirrup and as a brace against
ground-slipping when roping an animal.

=Cowhide=—(1) thick, heavy boot leather; (2) sole leather; (3) rough
boots of ditto and of pleasant memory of boyhood country days; (4) a
heavy flexible tapering leather whip used by teamsters and sometimes of
unpleasant youthful memory.

=Cowes coat=—see Dinner jacket.

=Cowl=—(1) a monk’s hood; (2) the garment of which it is a part.

=Cowlick=—(1) a tuft of hair turned up over the forehead, as if licked
by a cow; (2) a tuft of hair sticking up out of the crown of the head
that can’t be brushed down.

=Coxcomb=—a pretentious, conceited dandy.

=Crabbing=—a process in cloth weaving by which yarn is uniformly
moistened and stretched. See Cockling.

=Craiganputtach=—a variety of Scotch tweed from the town of that name.

=Crammer=—mentioned by Capt. Gronow: probably a choking neck stock or
high cravat.

=Crank=—a fool customer who knows better than the salesman what he
wants.

=Crape=—see Crepe.

=Crape-cloth=—a fine quality, light-weight, stoutly woven worsted
fabric, with a surface in imitation of silk crepe, much used for dress
coats.

=Crash=—(1) coarse linen toweling or suiting; (2) a light-weight
“homespun” woolen suiting woven in imitation of linen toweling.

=Cravat=—a necktie or scarf, particularly of the larger, hand-tied
varieties.

=Cravat pin=—see Scarf p.

=Cravatings=—silk fabrics designed for neckdressings.

=Cravenette=—a process applied to yarns before weaving, rendering the
cloths made therefrom repellent to water and moisture; sometimes applied
also to the woven fabric with satisfactory results; a secret process
owned by The Cravenette Company and B. Priestley & Co., of Bradford,
England. Frequently, the word is most erroneously misused as a name for
an overcoat, tho the word strictly refers only to the proofing process,
and strictly represents, therefore, neither a garment nor a fabric.

=Crease=—a prest fold.

=Crease=—a large dagger used by the Malays. (Kris.)

=Crease line=—in tailoring (1) the line along which a coat collar is
folded; (2) where a lapel or rever is turned; (3) a horizontal line in
the center of trousers legs, front and back; (4) any other place where a
crease may be necessary or fashionable.

=Credit=—the precious privilege of obtaining goods one day and of paying
for them, if you can, some other day.

=Credit clothier=—term specially applied to retail tradesmen who sell
clothes on the installment plan, exacting a larger profit for their
“obliging” accommodation.

=Creedmore=—a sort of brogan or blucher shoe for farmers, railroaders,
etc., made of extra heavy leather, double stitcht and reinforced by
rivets, and having commonly an outside sole leather counter.

=Creepers=—a baggy sort of dress for children learning to move about;
usually bifurcated.

=Creole=—a stout shoe similar to a Congress gaiter, but with tops and
uppers cut in one piece and without caps.

=Crepe=—generic name for semi-transparent fabrics of silk, wool or
cotton, or combinations thereof, having a weave effect characterized by
a crinkly surface of minute irregular ridges or sometimes of small
twisted knots or puckers, usually produced by making the weft or warp
(or both) of hard twisted threads, each alternate group twisted
reversely, which by loom spacing and tension, relax and untwist when the
fabric is taken from the loom, resulting in the peculiarity described.
Black silk c. is used almost entirely for mourning.

=Crepe=—a species of thrown silk. See Throwing.

=Crepe cloth=—see Crape c.

=Crepe de Chine=—a fine, soft, thin silk fabric slightly crinkled; used
for neckwear, mufflers, etc.

=Crepe de sante=—a light-weight cotton or linen fabric, resembling momie
in weave, used for undergarments, pajamas, etc.

=Crepele=—French word meaning crepe-effect.

=Crib=—a small bed; a berth or bunk.

=Cricket=—a small footstool.

=Cricketing=—general name for fine twilled flannel suitings (from
popular British use).

=Crispin=—a shoemaker. See St. Crispin.

=Crispin cloak=—see Houppelande.

=Croat=—a cravat; such as was worn by the Croatians in the French army
in 1636.

=Crocheted tie=—a slimsy thing on a level with colored shoe laces;
usually a souvenir of a misguided sweetheart.

=Crock=—to blacken, or stain, or lose color, as a dye that is not fast.

=Crocus finish=—a superior glaze or polish given to knife blades, etc.

=Crofter=—a peasant worker in (British) woolen or linen mills; a linen
bleacher; a worker at crude hand looms.

=Crofting=—the bleaching of linen or cotton fabrics on grass or
bleaching grounds.

=Croise=—weaving term indicating that the warp threads cross each other
on the back of the fabric, as velvet, broadcloth, etc., forming a sort
of twill.

=Crop=—a short wooden riding or hunting whip with a leather loop instead
of a lash at one end and usually a handle at the other.

=Crop=—a growth of hair or beard; a wig.

=Cropping=—technical term for nap-shearing.

=Cross dyed=—trade term for fabrics in which, in weaving, a skein-dyed
decorativ thread of a dark color, usually black, is woven into the
fabric in the gray, and the whole piece afterward dyed a lighter color,
permitting the dark decoration to show thru. Also called resist dyed
(qv).

=Cross-gartered=—see Malvolio in “Twelfth Night”.

=Cross-legged=—the manner in which journeymen tailors work, whence their
inclination to parenthesis of the legs.

=Cross pockets=—regular p. (qv).

=Cross stitches=—threads crossing one another, either singly (in the
middle) or doubly (in the ends), something like a snake fence; used for
staying the edges of velvet on collars, but often used for ornament
only.

=Cross stripes=—in weaving, s. running across the width instead of along
the length; horizontally.

=Crossbred=—the best sheep for mutton tho producing coarse wool.

=Crossbreed=—wool classification term. See Wool.

=Crotch=—juncture of the two halves of a trouser.

=Crotch piece=—a triangular piece of goods sewed onto the inner legs of
trousers at the crotch when cut from goods not wide enough to permit of
unspliced chopping.

=Crotch seam=—the fork s. See Stride.

=Crown=—(1) the upper part of a hat, particularly the flat or table part
thereof; (2) the top piece of a flat crowned cap.

=Crown=—a decorativ circlet or covering for the head, worn, carried or
displayed as a mark of kingly or sovereign power; unknown in U. S.

=Crown=—the upper pyramid of a diamond. See Brilliant cutting.

=Crown-piece=—see Crown.

=Crow’s-foot tack stitch=—in tailoring, an ornamental tack for ends of
pockets, vents or inverted plaits. The tack is first laid out in a
triangle and the threads laid in from base to apex-sides, alternately
from one side and then the other, until the threads meet at the base.
This is the most common form; there are variations, not differing
greatly in effect or method.

=Crow’s-foot=—a three-pointed embroidery stitch sometimes used in
finishing pockets. See above.

=Crow’s-toe=—same as Crow’s-foot.

=Cruiser=—a waterproof moccasin boot with a sewed-on sole and a medium
heel, both studded with small hob nails.

=Crush hat=—the collapsible opera h.

=Crush opera=—same as O. hat.

=Crusher=—a soft felt hat, not hurt if stuft into a bag; much loved of
travelers.

=Crutch=—the crotch or fork; (properly crotch).

=Crutch=—a walking prop for cripples and invalids.

=Ct.=—abbreviation for carat.

=Cue=—see Queue.

=Cuff box=—a receptacle for cuffs; usually of leather.

=Cuff button=—wrist jewelry.

=Cuff links=—cuff buttons. See Links.

=Cuffs=—(=1=) ornamental finishing to coat sleeves; (=2=) separate or
attacht bands as a finishing for shirt sleeves.

=Cuirass=—defensiv armor covering the entire upper part of the body.

=Culet=—see Collet point.

=Cummerbund=—a broad, soft sash.

=Cup button=—bowl shape.

=Curl=—a cute little kink.

=Curled yarn=—weft y. commonly composed of two or three threads of
contrasting colors, characterized by loops or curls at intervals,
variously effected.

=Curling=—a process in hat manufacture whereby brims are shaped to
conform exactly to a model.

=Curling iron=—a machine that had better be left altogether to women,
who have hair to burn.

=Currier=—one who curries or dresses leather.

=Curtain=—the waist lining of trousers.

=Custom made=—made in the mode; to order and to measure.

=Custom tailor=—one who makes clothes to order only. Compare Merchant t.

=Customer=—an individual highly prized by the proprietor and patronized
by the salesperson; sometimes called an “Indian”.

=Customer’s labels=—in the readymade clothing trade (wholesale) a name
given to woven silk labels, bearing retailer’s names, sewed into neck of
coats.

=Customs inspector’s uniform=—coat, vest, trousers and cap of dark blue
cloth, the coat 4-button double-breasted in winter with 2 lower pockets
with flaps, 1 outside welted breast and 1 inside breast pocket; in
summer to be 4 buttons, single-breasted, square cut. Inspectors of
passenger’s baggage wear red cap instead of blue. Insignia indicating
rank worn on front of cap. All coat and vest buttons of flat bone, to be
covered with shells when on duty.

=Cut=—a coil of two hanks of yarn.

=Cut goods=—trade term for hosiery knitted on a round knitting machine,
the tubular, unshaped product being cut into required lengths, then
footed, shaped, etc., by cutting out and adding other pieces as needed;
the cheapest process of manufacture.

=Cut mark=—a mark fixt on the warp during dressing or beaming, to
indicate a certain length and serve as a point for separating two
adjoining pieces of cloth when woven.

=Cut-off cuff=—a sewed on or special c.

=Cut-off vamp=—same as Short v.

=Cut pile=—having a pile made by cutting the loops of the warp or floats
of the filling on certain fabrics, as velvet, plush, etc.

=Cut velvet=—see Velvet.

=Cut wig=—see Wig.

=Cutaway frock coat=—a single-breasted f. c. with the skirts cut in a
slanting line from a point near the waist. See Frock c. Occasionally—and
whimsically—this c. is made double-breasted, but such an order is the
despair of the tailor because of the difficulty of obtaining a smart
appearance.

=Cutlas=—a heavy, curved short sword with one cutting edge and a
bowl-shaped guard, used mostly in hand-to-hand naval engagements;
latterly being discontinued.

=Cutler=—a dealer in knives, scissors, razors, table cutlery, surgical
instruments, etc.; a manufacturer or repairer of same.

=Cutlery=—cutting instruments collectivly.

=Cuts=—trade term for less than a bolt or full piece of goods; short
lengths.

=Cutter=—(1) in tailoring, the man who takes the measurements and drafts
and cuts the paper patterns, which, in the larger establishment are
turned over to “choppers” (qv) who “make the lay” on the cloth and cut
the cloth; (2) in ready-to-wear clothing manufacturing the “cutter” is
the man who lays out the pattern on the cloth and cuts the cloth, either
by shears, electric cutting machine or long knife—corresponding to the
“chopper” of the merchant tailor; (3) in shoe manufacturing, one who
lays the patterns on the leather and cuts therefrom the vamps or other
parts of a shoe.

=Cutters-up=—manufacturers of various articles of apparel. See
Cutting-up trade.

=Cutting knife=—a long, tapering k. (24 to 30 in. blade) working in a
groove or slot, used for cutting cloth, linings, etc., in large shops.
As many as 75 layers of cloth may be cut at one stroke.

=Cutting machine=—an electrically operated m. for cutting several
thicknesses of cloth at one operation, moved about by hand and
controlled at will of the operator. There are two principal styles (1) a
straight knife 5 to 6 in. long, and (2) a circular or wheel knife 3½ to
4½ in. in diameter, which will cut thru about 30 layers of heavy cloth
and about 45 of light cloth; the straight knife will cut several more
layers.

=Cutting-up trade=—indicativ of the trades that buy yard goods for
purposes of manufacturing, as clothiers, tailors, shirt makers, etc., as
distinguished from the jobbing trade.

=Cutty=—a short-stemmed pipe.


                                   D

=Dalmatic=—a wide sleeved tunic reaching to the knees, worn over the alb
or cassock at mass and communion by deacons; also a medieval state or
coronation robe. As an ecclesiastical vestment it was originally white
with wide perpendicular stripes of purple; as now worn it follows the
color of the day with stripes of embroidery.

=Damascened=—see Damascus blade and Jowhir.

=Damascus blade=—general term for swords famed for the quality and
temper of the metal as well as the beauty of the jowhir or watering of
the blades.

=Damask=—a twill woven fabric of linen, cotton, silk, etc., with
loom-figured all-over patterns.

=Damask=—steel workt in the Damascus style, showing the wavy lines of
the different metals; also called watered and twisted.

=Dame fashion=—a fetich.

=Damier=—large square checks.

=Dancing clog=—a laced leather low shoe with wooden sole (very noisy).

=Dancing pump=—a low-heeled, low shoe with short vamps, with or without
ornamental bow at instep.

=Dandified=—dandyish; foppish.

=Dandy=—a beau; not quite a dude.

=Dandy=—something out of the common; first-class.

=Dandy trap=—a loose stone, which slips when trodden on, and, in wet
weather, throws up the mud under it, to the great detriment of the
clothes of the victim.

=Darbies=—cant for irons or handcuffs.

=Darning stitch=—a s. peculiar to darning or embroidery.

=Dart=—a place in a garment from which a tapering piece or V has been
cut to make it fit the figure, as at the waist. Same as fish.

=Dauber=—a small brush or other arrangement for applying blacking or
polish to shoes, incidentally soiling the hands.

=Day dress=—generally, single and double-breasted frock coats, as
contrasted with swallowtails and Tuxedos for evening dress and sack
coats for day business and lounge wear.

=De Joinville=—a neck dressing, a plain, flat strip of satin or silk
which must be folded before it is put on, and is passed thru a flat
(gold) clasp or “scarf ring”, having a hinge at one side and a spike or
projection on the inner side of the rear part for engaging and keeping
in place the adjusted tie; sometimes this clasp is made with a hinged
pin; also the scarf is frequently tied as an ascot, puff, once-over,
waterfall, etc.

=Dead gold=—unburnisht.

=Dead hairs=—see Kemp.

=Dead horse=—(nautical commerce) wages paid before they are earned.

=Dead wool=—fleece taken from pelts of sheep that have died. Same as
Kemp.

=Debeige=—see Beige.

=Decoration=—trade term for the white or bright-colored threads used to
lighten up worsted and other otherwise plainish fabrics; usually
employed when the “decoration” is of silk or mercerized threads.

=De soy=—see Sergedusoy.

=Deep mourning=—lusterless black outer garments with crepe and no social
intercourse or amusements.

=Deep scye=—a variety of armhole not fitting up close under the arm, as
is usual, but where the front and back parts of the coat are cut away in
a descending curve to a point a little above the waist, affecting, of
course, the style of sleeve also.

=Degage=—easy; unconventional; neglige.

=Delaine=—a name given to combing wools. See Wool.

=Delivery=—getting goods to the purchaser; usually behind promised time.

=Delivery boy=—a pert young imp, hired, in the opinion of customers, to
talk back to them.

=Deltoid muscle=—the pons asinorum of tailoring.

=Demi-toilette=—day dress.

=Demi-vest=—see Vest-front.

=Denim=—a heavy, twilled cotton fabric, usually woven with plain colored
warp threads, as blue, gray, brown, etc., with white weft; used for
overalls, jumpers, etc. Dungaree.

=Denmark satin=—a coarse, worsted fabric, woven with smooth, satin
twilled surface; a variety of lasting cloth.

=Dent’s=—trade diminutiv for the general line of gloves made by Dent,
Allcroft & Co., London.

=Dental floss=—a lightly twisted antiseptic heavy silk yarn used for
cleansing between the teeth.

=Dental powder=—“tooth powder”. See Dentifrice.

=Dentifrice=—any substance or preparation used in cleansing the teeth.

=Dentist’s coat=—a short working jacket of heavy drill or duck, not
unlike barber’s c., barkeeper’s c., waiter’s c., etc.

=Department store=—the apotheosis of the junk shop.

=Depilatory=—a chemical preparation for removing hair from face or other
parts of the body.

=Deposit=—a tailor’s insurance against loss if you fail to call for your
suit.

=Derby jacket=—same as D. sack.

=Derby sack=—a single-breasted s. coat with the regular front, with a
short underarm cut terminating in a waistline extending back to the side
seam, meeting a body-shaped back part which has a center vent reaching
to the made waistline, and finisht with inverted (side) plaits also
reaching to the waistline.

=Deshabille=—undress.

=Designer=—one who originates and plans styles for manufacturing; in
wholesale clothing manufacturing one who also cuts the (first) paper
patterns, which are afterward turned over to an assistant to grade into
sizes.

=Detroit cap=—a c., usually of fur, having a round crown, a rolling band
highest at the back and sloping to the front, meeting a visor that may
be rolled up or down.

=Devil=—a machine employed in hat manufacturing for thoroly mixing furs
after carroting.

=Devil=—(woolen manufacture) see Willowing machine.

=Devil’s receptacles=—a nickname given to the wide, long, trailing,
slasht sleeves worn by the gay bucks of the 14th century.

=Devon=—a heavy, close-milled overcoat cloth, in character between
melton and kersey; one of the old names for a variety of kersey.

=Dew retting=—the decomposition of flax by dew. See Retting.

=Dhotee=—an East Indian concession to modesty. See Waistcloth.

=Diagonal=—general term for worsted fabrics having a diagonal twill
produced by raising the warp threads progressivly, from left to right,
or right to left, usually at an angle of 45°, in groups of 2, 3, 4,
etc., and filling in the weft threads to make them stand out in ridges.

=Diapers=—our first garments.

=Dice=—a square, woven pattern.

=Dicer=—a silk hat.

=Dicky=—originally (about 1809) a stiff, standing collar; latterly a
separate shirt bosom, with collar band, worn in place of shirt by the
impecunious. (Also Dickey).

=Didies=—see Diapers.

=Digitalia=—the fingered glove of the ancient Romans. See Chirothecae.

=Dimity=—a fine cotton fabric having a stripe or figure raised on the
face and deprest on the back.

=Dining jacket=—see Dinner coat.

=Dink=—to dress or bedeck. (Scotch).

=Dinky=—absurdly small, skimpy or insufficient.

=Dinner jacket=—an informal dress coat without tails, somewhat like a
sack coat, for dinner wear, men’s evening parties, but not where ladies
are present, as at balls, operas, etc. Also called Cowes coat and Tuxedo
coat.

=Dip=—in tailoring, a downward inclination of the waist line of a frock
coat or the bottom line of a sack coat.

=Dip-front=—see Dip.

=Diplomatic uniform=—the court dress of American ministers abroad, while
officially “the ordinary dress of an American citizen” is, by official
approval, a plain dress coat and waistcoat, knee breeches, black silk
stockings and low shoes. This simplicity of attire, contrasted with
oriental sumptuousness and European splendor makes our ambassadors and
ministers peculiarly conspicuous.

=Dirk=—(1) a Scotch dagger generally without chape or guard; (2) a
midshipman’s side arm, either straight or curved. (British navy.)

=Dirk knife=—a clasp k. with a large dirk shaped blade.

=Discharge printing=—a method of producing patterns in textil fabrics by
dyeing in the piece of a solid color and printing the designs with a
bleaching agent. Compare Batik, Extracted, Resist dyeing,
Tied-and-dried, etc.

=Discount=—a rebate for prompt pay, or for imperfections, or out of
courtesy (as to clergymen), or delusivly as in most advertisements.

=Display=—(1) merchandise appropriately arranged for public view; (2)
personal ostentation.

=Distaff=—a rod or staff for holding a quantity of wool or flax in hand
spinning; usually held under the left arm.

=Distingue=—very smart; elegant.

=Dittis=—a fabric formerly made in Manchester, used for (and whence the
name of) Ditty bags (qv).

=Ditty bag=—(nautical) a small bag to hold sewing gear, shaving tackle,
etc.; a sailor’s “housewife”.

=Ditty box=—a small box for holding a sailor’s thread, needles, brushes,
combs, etc.

=Diver’s helmet=—see Diving dress.

=Diving dress=—a waterproof, air-tight garment, like a combined blouse
and trousers, with helmet, the whole hermetically sealed, heavily
weighted, and supplied thru pipes with air for the wearer to breathe.

=Diving suit=—see D. dress.

=Division list=—a proportionate scale of selling prices, used in the
clothing trade, showing the relativ prices of suits, coats, trousers,
vests and combinations thereof.

=Division square=—a tailor’s s. marked with the various fractional
computations commonly required in sub-dividing the taken measures when
drafting.

=Dobbie=—that part of a loom that raises and lowers the harness frames.
Also called Witch. (=Dobby=).

=Doctor’s cap=—(scholastic) usually of black velvet, with gold tassel.
See Mortarboard c.

=Doctor’s gown=—(scholastic) a loose flowing g., usually of silk, with
round, open sleeves barred with black velvet and faced down front with
same; or the velvet may correspond in color with the binding or edging
of hood.

=Doctored=—(1) manipulated; (2) adulterated.

=Doeskin=—a high grade woolen suiting, and trousering material, close
woven, fine twilled, fulled to a very considerable degree and finisht as
required, usually (1) dry, (2) doeskin, (3) melton or (4) worsted, being
respectivly (1) sheared of all nap, baring the weave, (2) smooth nap,
weave nearly concealed, (3) a close standing nap, (4) smooth, hard and
glossy; there are also other finishes.

=Doeskin=—a fine quality of jean (qv) closely twilled and with a wool
filling.

=Doeskin finish=—see Doeskin and Dress faced.

=Dog=—vernacular for affected or redundant finery or style; to put on
airs; vulgar ostentation.

=Dog-rabbitting=—see Piecing-out.

=Dogskin=—a stout, dry, inelastic glove leather made from kyudles or
sheep in imitation of it.

=Dolman=—a sort of cape or cloak with wide open sleeves; also the
uniform jacket of a hussar, worn like a cape, with the sleeves hanging
loose.

=Dom Pedro=—a heavy leather brogan.

=Domestic=—made here; not imported—for which thanks often should be
given.

=Domestic finish=—laundry term for linen finisht without gloss and with
but little bluing.

=Domestics=—cotton goods of American manufacture as distinguisht from
imported goods. Always used in the plural.

=Domet=—a loosely woven, napt, all-cotton, flannel, originally woven
with a woolen weft; largely used for neglige shirts, night robes,
children’s wear, etc. See Outing cloth.

=Domino=—(1) a mask or half mask worn at masquerades; (2) an adjustable
robe or hood worn at masquerades; (3) a loose flowing hooded garment of
ecclesiastical wear.

=Donegal tweed=—strictly that hand-scoured, homespun tweed made wholly
in the county of Donegal, Ireland, on the hand looms of the peasantry;
more loosely tweeds made of Yorkshire yarns woven, dyed and finisht in
Donegal; falsely, any fabric in imitation thereof.

=Doorman’s livery=—same as Footman’s dress 1.

=Dornex=—a heavy 17th century coarse linen, used for servants’ clothing.

=D’Orsay=—trade term for a certain well-rounded effect in the curl of a
hat brim. Compare Pencil curl and Anglesea.

=Double-and-twist=—(1) trade term for weaving yarns doubled and twisted
in combinations of two or more colors; (2) fabrics woven from such
yarns—Bannockburns and Drummond worsteds, being examples.

=Double-breasted=—loosely, any coat, waistcoat, undershirt or other
garment having a double thickness in the front with a double row of
buttons and buttonholes or other means of fastening.

=Double-breasted cutaway=—a variation of the single-breasted frock,
known about 1840, and but infrequently seen since, despite attempts to
revive it. See Cutaway frock coat.

=Double-breasted reefer=—same as D.-b. sack coat.

=Double-breasted sack coat=—see Sack c.

=Double cloth=—general term for any fabric composed of two single
textures woven and joined at one operation, the conjunction being
effected by interlacing part of the warp threads of one texture with
those of the opposit texture, as (1) a fabric with two warp surfaces and
one of weft in the center; (2) a fabric with two weft surfaces and one
of warp in the center; (3) a fabric with two distinct series of warps
and wefts, each woven separately, but united at regular intervals to
each other during the course of weaving. Unless the object is to produce
effects not possible with single cloths the doubling is usually for the
purpose of giving weight and body without the expense of weaving the
face pattern thru and thru. Also called Backt-c., Frenchback, etc.

=Double collar=—a folded c. (qv).

=Double corkscrew=—see Chain-weave serge.

=Double crepe=—a very crisp, crinkly black silk c. (qv) used for deep
mournings. Compare Single c.

=Double cuff=—a c. that is folded and turned back on itself or onto the
sleeve. Compare Single c., Fold-back c.

=Double dyed=—dyed twice over; thoroly impregnated; said also of mixt
goods dyed once in a cotton dye and once in a wool dye, or otherwise, as
the case may be.

=Double faced=—fabrics having a pattern on each side.

=Double knit=—knitted with a double stitch, giving a double thickness to
the fabric.

=Double milled=—sheared twice.

=Double pick=—two filling threads run together into the same shed of the
warp.

=Double pile=—any fabric with pile or heavy nap on two sides, as double
plush, double-faced canton flannel, etc.

=Double satin de Lyon=—a s. having both surfaces glossy.

=Double sole=—trade term for hosiery made with a s. much heavier than
the body of the stocking. See Spliced heel.

=Double soled=—term for shoes made with extra thick soles.

=Double-stitcht=—an edge or seam finish obtained by stitching twice in
parallel rows of stated width, as “¼ in. d. s.”. See “Single s.”.

=Double-stitcht seam=—same as cord s. (qv) but stitcht twice and with a
larger underlay or outlet for the second row of stitching. Also called
Lap s.

=Double-width=—generally, all fabrics ranging from 48 to 60 in. wide and
folded lengthwise before being rolled into bolts; originally goods were
“single width” (27 to 36 in.) and many are still so woven, fine
trousering and shirtings particularly; strictly, the proper term is
“quarter”, as four-quarter (⁴⁄₄) for 36 in.; six-quarter (⁶⁄₄) for 54
in., etc.

=Double work=—knitting term for the use of two threads together instead
of one, and for the fancy effects so produced.

=Doublet=—a close-fitting outer body garment with sleeves and sometimes
with short skirts and belted at the waist, worn from 15th to 17th
centuries, usually with hose.

=Doupe=—gauze weaving.

=Dowdy=—see Slob.

=Dowlas=—originally, a strong, plain woven linen fabric used for working
blouses, etc.; latterly, a sort of stout calico.

=Down at the heels=—poverty; destitution; general seediness; needing
clothes.

=Downright=—see Wool.

=Drafting cape=—see Measuring c. and Beatty c.

=Drap=—French word for cloth; seldom applied to cotton fabrics.

=Drap d’alma=—a fine, close, flat ribbed twilled fabric of wool or silk
and wool, finisht on but one side.

=Drap d’ete=—a fine double warp worsted fabric with fine lengthwise
cords or ridges on the face, and a smooth back, used for dress and
clerical wear, summer coats, etc.

=Drape=—loosely, any smooth-faced fine cloth for dress wear; crepe (qv).

=Draper=—a dealer in cloths; also a clothier, haberdasher or dry goods
merchant.

=Draw string=—a tightening tape or s. working thru a gathered hem, or
eyelets.

=Drawer supports=—any device attacht to trousers (or to suspenders) for
the purpose of holding up the nether undergarments.

=Drawers=—nether undergarments.

=Drawing=—a process of woolen manufacture by which the combed fleece
assumes a yarn or thread-like appearance; roving.

=Drawing stitch=—a method of making an edge-to-edge join or a seam
without a lap, a s. being taken up thru one side, then drawn over and
down under and up thru the other side, and so on; usually employed
joining collars to coats.

=Drawn in=—see Hold in.

=Dreadnought=—see Fearnought.

=Drech=—trash; trashy. (German.)

=Dress=—general term for garments and articles of apparel and the
science and manner of wearing them; more particularly one’s outer
attire.

=Dress=—tailor’s term, indicating the manner in which a man disposes
himself in his trousers, necessitating a certain difference in the
crotch-fulness of one trousers leg, as “right d.” or “left d.”

=Dress=—(=navy=) the uniform to be worn upon the reception of various
prescribed officers of the government, governors of states and
territories, American ambassadors, ministers, etc.; on visits in part to
commanding officers; on Sunday morning inspections. Consists of—for all
commissioned officers, except chaplains, chief boatswains, chief
gunners, chief carpenters and chief sailmakers—frock coat, undress
trousers, (white may be prescribed) cockt hat, epaulets, sword and
undress belt, scarf, white gloves, medals and badges; for officers
excepted above and for warrant officers, mates and clerks, the same as
“undress A”; for midshipmen, the same as prescribed for commissioned
officers, substituting blue cap for cockt hat and shoulder knots for
epaulets; for chief petty officers, except bandmasters, and for stewards
and officers’ cooks; blue dress: blue cloth coat and blue cloth
trousers, blue cap, white shirt, white collar and cuffs, black cravat;
white dress: white coat, white trousers, white cap, white shirt, white
collar, black cravat. For bandsmen; blue dress: full dress coat, blue
trousers, helmet, white standing collar, belt, gloves (and for
bandmaster, a sword); white dress: same as blue dress but with white
trousers. For all other enlisted men; blue dress: blue overshirt, blue
cloth trousers, blue cap, neckerchief, knife lanyard (seaman branch
only); white dress: dress jumper, white dress trousers, white hat,
neckerchief, knife lanyard (seaman branch only); (=Revenue cutter
service=) worn by officers performing any special duty with enlisted men
under arms away from the vessel, and when calling officially upon
officers other than commanders of vessels of war or military posts;
consists of frock coat, white or blue trousers, cap, shoulder straps,
sword and black leather belt over the coat which is worn buttoned.

=Dress belt=—(=army=) see Army b.

=Dress board=—(=navy=) a bulletin b. on which the prescribed dress or
uniform of the day to be worn by the crew is described by executiv
officer’s orders.

=Dress breeches=—(=army=) for all officers, of same material and with
same stripes as d. trousers, cut in the prescribed pattern and fastened
from the knee down with dark bone buttons or with lacings. See also
Service b.

=Dress cap=—(=army=) for all officers, same as Full dress c. (qv) except
with certain differences of trimming and insignia. For enlisted men: of
dark blue cloth of same style as prescribed for officers, bearing a
stripe of cloth of the color of the corps, department or arm of service,
with appropriate rating insignia.

=Dress coat=—see Evening dress.

=Dress coat=—(=army=) a sack c. of dark blue cloth or serge. For general
officers: double-breasted with high rolling collar and 2 rows of gilt
buttons groupt according to rank, 3 buttons on cuff; skirt to extend
one-third of distance to knee, with 4 inch slit at hip for saber; all
pockets inside. For all other officers: single-breasted with standing
collar, c. closing with flap containing concealed fastenings, c. cut
form fitting with saber slit and side vents and trimmed around bottom,
front edges, collar and vents with 1¼ in. flat black mohair braid;
shoulder and collar ornaments per regulations. For enlisted men: a
single-breasted sack c. of dark blue cloth, cut with a straight front,
fastened with 6 buttons down the front; standing collar; shoulder loops
of same goods let in at shoulder seam and fastened to collar with small
button; 3 buttons on cuffs; collar, shoulder loops and cuffs piped with
cord-edge braid of the color of corps, department or arm of service.

=Dress derby=—a d.-shaped hat, covered with gros-grain or other plain
silk; for wear with dinner jacket. Also called Tuxedo hat.

=Dress faced=—a term sometimes given to woolen cloths, such as doeskin,
broadcloth, beaver, etc., having a slight nap. Compare Bareface finish,
Scotch finish, Velvet finish.

=Dress frock coat=—(=Revenue cutter service=) same as Full dress f. c.,
but worn without epaulets.

=Dress gloves=—(1) generally, g. of fine kid; (2) specifically, g. of
white kid or fabric for evening dress.

=Dress jumper—(navy)= worn by all enlisted men, except chief petty
officers, officers’ stewards, officers’ cooks and bandsmen; made of
bleacht cotton drill, of pattern similar to the blue overshirt (see
naval overshirt) except that the body hangs straight and loose to 2 to 3
inches below the hips; trimmings same as for blue overshirt (but all of
white), the collar and cuffs being of dark blue flannel.

=Dress refines=—see Refine cloth.

=Dress reform=—an ever-recurring evanescent dream.

=Dress reformer=—a human by-product of civilization subject to cerebral
coruscations, occasionally menacing to the peace of his fellow men.

=Dress shield=—a light rubber or other perspiration-proof device
sometimes used in the armholes of coats.

=Dress shirt=—a (loose) trade term for a white or colored s. with a full
set-in stiff bosom. Compare Evening d. s.

=Dress shirt protector=—see Shirt p.

=Dress suit=—see Evening dress.

=Dress suit case=—see Suit c.

=Dress tie=—a folded strip of white linen, lawn or dimity to be tied in
a bow, worn only with full evening dress.

=Dress trousers=—see Evening dress.

=Dress trousers—(army)= for all general officers, including staff corps
and departments but not engineers—of dark blue cloth without stripe,
welt or cord; for chief of artillery, of light blue cloth with 1½ in.
stripe of scarlet cloth; for all other officers, the same as for full
dress. For enlisted men: of sky-blue kersey, of regulation cut.

=Dress uniform—(army)= the prescribed u. worn by officers at reviews,
inspections, parades and other ceremonies when the troops are in d. u.;
at such other duties under arms as may be prescribed; on courtsmartial,
courts of inquiry, and boards of officers when prescribed; also
authorized as a mess dress, and for social occasions when full dress is
not worn. For all officers, dismounted: dress coat and trousers, dress
cap, black shoes; under arms add dress belt (worn under coat) saber and
white gloves; same, mounted: dress coat, dress breeches, dress cap, drab
leather gloves, black boots, spurs; under arms, add dress belt (under
the coat) and saber; for chaplains, dismounted: dress coat and trousers,
chaplain’s hat, black shoes, white gloves (when occasions require
gloves); same, mounted: dress coat and breeches, chaplain’s hat, black
boots, spurs; for enlisted men: worn when prescribed by commanding
officer; dismounted: dress coat and trousers, dress cap, black shoes
and, when under arms, white gloves, russet leather belt, and cartridge
box; mounted: dress coat, service breeches, dress cap, russet leather
shoes, leggings, spurs, drab leather gloves and, if under arms, saber
belt and cartridge box.

=Dress waistcoat=—see Evening d. w.

=Dress worsted=—general term for fine grades of unfinisht and
face-finisht worsteds, used for dress wear. See Unfinisht worsted.
Whipcord, etc.

=Dressed leather=—any l. that has been curried or stuft with oils to
increase its flexibility, its resistance to water, etc.

=Dressing=—(1) a process in weaving by which every thread of the warp is
uniformly set in its proper position in the loom; (2) last process in
shoemaking consisting of final applications of dressing or polish, the
treatment of dull or bright spots, stains, etc.

=Dressing bag=—a fashion-writer’s affectation. See Suit case, Kit b.,
Traveling b., etc.

=Dressing gown=—a loose g. or robe worn while dressing or in undress.

=Dressy=—fond of dress; supposedly elegant or stylish.

=Drill=—trade abbreviation for drilling (qv).

=Drilling=—general term for stout twilled cotton and linen fabrics used
for pockets, interlinings, summer trousers, etc.

=Driving coat=—(1) a c. designed for protection or style when driving;
(2) a duster (qv).

=Driving gloves=—g. with re-enforced palms and under-fingers, often with
gauntlet tops.

=Driving hood=—a knitted covering for the head that may be worn
variously, as a h. over a cap or without a cap, or as a throat muffler,
etc., according to adjustment.

=Driving rug=—a carriage robe.

=Drop stitch=—knitting term for a skipt or slipt s., done to effect a
lacy or other pattern.

=Drum-major’s shako—(marine corps)= see Full dress cap.

=Drummer=—usually the whole band, judging by his noise.

=Drummond worsted=—in general, any plain Oxford w., twill woven, one
warp of black and one of one or two shades of gray (or white), both
twisted, and then alternated, the filling yarn being of the same
colorings and arrangement. Strictly the term belongs to worsteds
manufactured by a firm of English weavers of that name and with whom
this peculiar plainish effect seems to have originated.

=Dry cleaning=—a naptha or other chemical process; meaning not washed in
water.

=Dry finish=—trade term for woolen fabrics (as doeskins) sheared of all
nap, baring the weave.

=Drying frame=—any contrivance for drying underwear, hosiery, etc., in
shape and without loss of size, the garment being pulled over same and
adjusted; some of these frames are made of wood, others of spring wire,
etc.

=Dubbing=—a preparation for softening and waterproofing leather.

=Dub=—(1) in weaving, to dress with teazels for raising a nap (see
Teazeling); (2) in leather making, the act or process of rubbing in a
softening or waterproof mixture or dressing.

=Duck=—a heavy, strong, plain woven linen or cotton fabric similar to,
but of lighter weight than, canvas, used for summer clothing, hospital,
army and navy uniforms, and as vestings, etc. In weaving, two threads of
warp are laid side by side and treated as one.

=Dude=—not worth description.

=Duds=—clothes.

=Duffels=—an old-time heavy woolen cloaking with a thick tufted or
knotted nap, originally made in Duffel, Flanders; match cloth.

=Duffle bag=—about the same as Wangan b (qv).

=Dull=—in the shoe trade, a general term indicating a distinction
between bright or patent (or enamel leathers) and calf, kid and other
mat or dull finisht leathers.

=Dumbbells=—link cuff buttons with rigid bars; name from having
originally been made with plain balls at either end, resembling
dumbbells.

=Dummy=—a figure on which clothes are displayed; a “form” (qv).

=Dummy box coat=—not a real c.; an unusable c., carried by coachmen for
show; an illustration of the economics of snobbery.

=Dummy buttonhole=—not cut thru but stitcht on the surface only, for
purposes of ornament.

=Dummy try-on=—a basted-together fictitious “try-on” of linings and
interlinings “fitted” to the customer while the actual coat is being
made up without t.-o. or fitting; a device of “cheap tailors” to save
the expense of try-ons. Compare Bluff try-on.

=Dumps=—skates. See “High dutchers”.

=Dun=—a result of not paying your bills.

=Dunce cap=—a tall, conical paper c. awarded to some luckless scholar in
the old days for lack of brilliancy and worn, for the weal of the class,
in some prominent corner of the room, or on a seat by the teacher.
“Those were happy days”. Also called Fool’s c.

=Dundee=—a twill-finisht thibet, made to imitate unfinisht worsted.

=Dundrearys=—long, flowing side whiskers.

=Dungaree=—in the British navy a fine quality of blue jeans used for
sailors’ shirt collars, watch-marks on sleeves, etc.; also in a coarse
grade for working clothes; in the American navy a coarse cotton stuff
similar to denim; a term commonly used in reference to navy working
clothes.

=Dungaree junipers=—(=navy=) a blouse of blue denim, single-breasted
sack pattern, buttoned to the neck and loosely fitting; worn by enlisted
men on working duty.

=Dungaree trousers=—(=navy=) working t. of blue denim, made with a fly
instead of with front falls, worn by enlisted men.

=Dunnage bag=—a large, long b., commonly of canvas, for laundry, etc.

=Dunrobin=—a fine Scotch plaid.

=Durance=—lasting (qv). (Same as below?)

=Durant=—a strong, close-grained woolen stuff of Revolutionary times.

=Dust=—an article kept in stock in large quantities in all mercantil
establishments and usually hard to move save by continued exertion.

=Dust coat=—same as Duster.

=Dust shield=—see Wind s.

=Duster=—a light overcoat of linen, mohair or other thin fabric, once
extensivly used for traveling or driving.

=Dutch metal=—an alloy from which much of the “gold” lace of commerce is
manufactured.

=Duttees=—the coarse brown calicoes of India.

=Duxbak=—proprietary name for a semi-waterproof canvas used for sporting
and rough weather clothing.

=Dye bath=—a solution of coloring matter for dyeing purposes.

=Dyebeck=—same as Dye bath.

=Dyeing=—the art and operation of coloring textil fabrics by immersion
in a properly prepared bath; dyes are chiefly vegetable or anilin, and a
source of anguish if they fade unduly. See an encyclopedia.

=Dyer=—one who dyes fabrics.

=Dyer’s weed=—see Woad.

=Dye-stuff=—any material used for dyeing.


                                   E

=Ear caps=—see E. muffs.

=Ear flaps=—those parts of a cap that may be turned down to cover and
protect the ears from cold.

=Ear guards=—padded leather protectors worn by footballers.

=Ear lock=—the lock of hair curling over or near the ear; any lock of
hair on the side of the head; a love lock.

=Ear muffs=—pads or m. for wear over the ears in cold weather, usually
of velvet, held in place by an elastic cord or metal spring. Popular in
St. Louis with the first touch of frost.

=Ear rings=—jewelry worn in the ears, the lobs of which are pierced for
the purpose; once upon a time gentlemen wore them; nowadays noticed
mostly on foreign laborers.

=Ear tabs=—see E. flaps and E. muffs.

=Ear whiskers=—short tufts of scrub reaching to the depth of the ears.

=Easter=—tailor’s harvest time.

=Eating apron=—a garment for young children, having a bib and sleeves
made of one piece; also an a. without sleeves.

=Eau de Cologne=—a strongly perfumed toilet water; properly, that for
which the city of Cologne is celebrated. In this city the industry was
establisht in the beginning of the 17th century by Paul Feminis and
Maria Clementine, a nun, jointly possessing the secret and conducting
the business; at his death Feminis bequeathed the formula to the Farina
family, while the nun left it to Peter Schaeben; both families still
carry on the business and are the leading manufacturers.

=Ecru=—raw color, as of silk, linen, etc.; unbleacht.

=Edge baster=—in ready-to-wear clothing manufacture, a workman who
finishes the work begun by the straighteners, underbasters and edge
operators, by turning in the outer part and facing (of a coat) and
basting the edges preparatory to final felling and stitching.

=Edge operator=—in ready-to-wear clothing manufacture, a workman who
does only the first seaming of coat edges.

=Edge setting=—the process of burnishing the edges of shoe soles on a
lathe-like machine called an e. setter.

=Edge trimming=—see foregoing.

=Edges=—the e. of coats, waistcoats, etc., are variously denominated,
according to manner of making and finish, blind e., bluff e., braided
e., bound e., corded e., double-stitcht e., felled e., piped e., plain
e., prickt e., raw e., single-stitcht e., etc., which see.

=Effect threads=—weaving term for decorativ threads of different colors
added to worsted and woolen fabrics, usually of mercerized cotton or
silk, or resist-dyed wool or worsted.

=Effigeen=—an old-time lining fabric.

=Egyptian=—trade term for cotton grown in the Nile districts of Africa;
very silky, smooth and strong; more commonly known as Maco.

=Eiderdown=—a thick woolen-pile fabric, woven on a cotton stockinet
body.

=Elastic canvas=—a plain-woven fabric of linen or cotton, unbleacht or
bleacht, of various weights, used for stiffening garments.

=Elastic gore=—a woven tape-like fabric, made in such a manner with
rubber threads that it forms an elastic tape or goring which is inserted
in the sides of a shoe immediately over the ankles, made so that the
shoe may be stretcht and drawn on and held on the foot by this elastic
goring, no lacing being used in this style of shoe which is commonly
known as Congress shoe or gaiter.

=Elastic seam=—proprietary term for a make of undergarments of jeans,
nainsook, etc., having strips of elastic knitted material let in between
seams, or in places of strain, etc.

=Elastic stocking=—a s. of silk and rubber threads for reducing
swelling, aiding the muscles, etc.

=Elastic twill=—a fine flexible cloth used for dress wear.

=Elastic webbing=—any garter or suspender w. of silk, cotton or other
material having interwoven threads of pure rubber.

=Elasticity test=—to determin the quality and e. of silk thread, take a
yard of thread and hold it firmly in each hand on some set table or
object, and keeping one hand stationary, start to stretch it. If it
breaks off short there is either cotton or other adulterant.

=Elbow sleeves=—term for undershirts with sleeves reaching to the
elbows.

=Electric seal=—imitation sealskin, usually muskrat or cat.

=Electric tanning=—treatment by electric current in connection with the
astringent liquor, to hasten conversion into leather.

=Elegant=—a French dude.

=Elevator-boy’s suit=—same as Hall-boy’s s.

=Elk skin=—a soft, pliable, oilless leather, usually made of calf s. and
tanned by a chemical process; used chiefly for athletic and sporting
shoes.

=Ell=—a measure of length as for cloth, having different values in
different places, and now rarely used; in England an ell is 45 inches,
in Scotland 37 inches.

=Elysian=—a fine grade of overcoating cloth, having the nap laid in
diagonal lines or ripples, something like, but rougher than Chinchilla,
and with straighter hair.

=Embroidered=—ornamented with fancifully workt designs in stitches.

=Emerald=—a green precious stone anciently considered an enemy of
impurity and that would break if it but toucht the skin of an adulterer.

=En regle=—in high ceremonious attire.

=Enameled collar=—a shirt c. made of a material composed of two sheets
of white paper between which was a connecting layer of thin muslin
showing thru the paper sides, after pressure, with a cloth-like effect;
invented in 1857. Since made entirely of paper, the surfaces stampt to
imitate cloth.

=Enameled leather=—a heavy kind of upper leather finisht with a shiny
surface like patent leather, but in which a figure or pebble has been
workt into the surface of the enamel.

=End=—technical term for a thread of warp or weft.

=Ends=—remnants.

=Engagement ring=—something you work hard to save up for so she can
“show off” among her friends until she finds someone else to buy her a
more gorgeous one, when you may, if lucky, get it back.

=Engineer’s cap=—a flat crowned, nearly straight c., made on a band,
with a large visor.

=Engineer’s uniform=—(=army=) see Full dress, Dress u., White u.,
Service u., Fatigue u., et var.

=English foot=—trade term for hosiery made with a seam at either side of
the sole. See French f.

=English mourning crepe=—see Crepe.

=English square=—imposing name for a readymade scarf with flaring ends
(about 1900).

=English waist=—trade term for trousers made very high in the back.

=English walking coat=—a single-breasted cutaway frock c. with hip
pockets, usually made of fabrics less sedate than the formal black goods
used for the cutaway frock or morning c. (qv).

=English yarns=—worsted y. that have been well oiled before combing,
resulting in a smooth level yarn in which the fibers lie nearly parallel
to each other. Compare French y.

=Enlisted men’s uniform=—(=navy=) see Dress, Undress, Working dress;
(=army=) Full dress, Dress u., White u., Service u., Fatigue u.;
(=marine corps=) Full dress, Undress, Field u.; (=revenue cutter
service=) Full dress, Service dress. See also variations.

=Ensanguined undergarment=—a variant of “bloody shirt”.

=Ensign’s uniform=—see Special full dress, Full dress, Dress, Service
dress, Evening dress, Mess dress, Undress. Also variations.

=Enweave=—to intertwine or intermix by weaving; another form of inweave.

=Epaulet=—an ornamental badge of rank worn by certain officers of army,
navy, etc., on the shoulders of the coat, usually a sort of plastron of
gold bullion with gold fringe, and bearing insignia of rank. Now largely
supplanted by shoulder knots, shoulder straps, etc. (=Epaulette.=)

=Epauls Americaines=—French poking fun (?) at our wadded shoulders. See
American shoulders.

=Epigonation=—a lozenge-shaped ornament of stiffened silk bearing a
cross or picture, worn hanging from the girdle by the Greek and Russian
ministry.

=Epiminikia=—bands resembling the Latin maniple (qv) worn by bishops,
priests and deacons in the Greek and Russian churches, those for bishops
being richly ornamented.

=Episcopal ring=—a gold r., usually set with a large amethyst,
symbolizing that the wearer (a bishop) is wedded to his diocese.

=Epitrachelion=—a long, narrow stole worn by priests of the Greek and
Russian churches, resembling the Latin pallium (qv).

=Equi-pede=—a horseman’s coat, ample skirted and long enough to cover
the mounted rider (saddle and all) from neck to boots, a coat and apron
in one, quickly and easily contracted to the size of a sack covert coat
for walking and dismounted work generally.

=Erect=—not stooping.

=Erkens’ worsted=—a fine, close twilled worsted dress or coating cloth
resembling Venetian, the twills apparently crossing each other. (From
name of German manufacturer.)

=Espardènas=—see Alpargatas.

=Estamene=—similar to serge, but having a rough, nappy face resembling
cheviot.

=Etamine=—a light woolen cloth similar to batiste and nun’s cloth.

=Etiquette=—the formalities or usages of social or professional
intercourse.

=Etoffe=—French for cloth.

=Eton collar=—a folded shirt c., usually of white linen of medium hight
stand, but with a broad turnover of nearly uniform width all around,
folded at an angle; worn by boys.

=Eton jacket=—a short j. without collar or lapels, reaching only to the
waist line, first worn by the boys of Eton College.

=Etruscan gold=—luster removed by acid, leaving it satiny yellow.

=Eugenie’s wigs=—knitted montero caps (qv) presented by Empress Eugenie
to the Arctic exploration of 1875, and so dubbed by the jackies.

=Even exchange=—retail trade term, meaning the exchange of purchases for
something else without there being any difference in price.

=Evening dress=—the swallowtail and Tuxedo as opposed to frock coats for
day dress and sack coats for business and lounge wear; vulgarly “full
dress”.

=Evening dress A=—(=navy=) a uniform to be worn on occasions of ceremony
in the evening, to which officers are invited in their official
capacity, such as public balls, dinners and evening receptions. Consists
of—for all commissioned officers except chaplains, chief boatswains,
chief gunners, chief carpenters and chief sailmakers—evening dress coat,
evening dress waistcoat (blue), full dress trousers, cockt hat,
epaulets, sword and full dress belt, black tie, white gloves; for
chaplains the same as “Evening Dress B”; for midshipmen, the same as
prescribed for commissioned officers, substituting the blue cap for the
cockt hat and shoulder knots for epaulets. On occasions where the full
uniform would not be appropriate “Evening dress A” may be prescribed
without swords and belts and with blue caps instead of cockt hats; or in
hot weather, or in appropriate circumstances, mess dress with full dress
trousers may be ordered.

=Evening dress B=—(=navy=) a uniform to be worn at social evening
occasions where officers are invited in their official capacity, and at
dinner on board vessels other than those of the fourth rate by officers
for whom the evening dress coat has been prescribed (except when the
uniform of the day has been white). Consists of—for all commissioned
officers (except chief boatswains, chief gunners, chief carpenters and
chief sailmakers) and for midshipmen: evening dress coat, evening dress
waistcoat, blue (unless white is ordered), undress trousers (unless full
dress trousers are ordered), blue cap, black tie. In hot weather or
under other appropriate circumstances mess dress may be substituted.

=Evening dress coat=—a skirted c. with the foreparts cut off at the
waistline, the skirts commencing at the hips and gradually narrowing
downward, the front made with long-roll lapels, not to button, tho
furnished with buttons and buttonholes on each side, the lapels usually
faced with silk; invariably made of fine black cloth and properly lined
with black silk.

=Evening dress coat=—(=navy=) a uniform c. similar to a civilian’s e. d.
c., of dark blue cloth with 3 large navy buttons on each breast, well
spaced, two at the waist behind and one at the bottom of each fold, with
sleeve marks and epaulets as prescribed for frock c.; always worn open.
For chaplains the same with black silk buttons.

=Evening dress shield=—see Shirt protector.

=Evening dress shirt=—trade term for fine quality white d. s. with extra
large bosoms.

=Evening dress trousers=—plain t. of same goods as the coat, but
slightly shaped, and sometimes with a stripe of fancy braid down the
outside seams; in trousers for wear with the dinner jacket (Tuxedo) the
braid is omitted.

=Evening dress trousers=—(=marine corps=) for major general commandant
and all other officers, of dark blue cloth, cut after the prevailing
style of civilian’s evening dress, but with long snug fitting waist,
without pockets or buckle straps, suspender buttons inside the band,
outseams trimmed with 1¼ inch stripe of gold lace. Also white t. for
wear with white mess jacket, of same cut but without stripe on outseams.

=Evening dress uniform=—(=army=) a special full d. u. authorized for
wear on occasions of ceremony to which officers are invited in their
official capacity, such as balls, official dinners and receptions, etc.:
an evening dress coat of dark blue cloth cut on the lines of the
civilian dress coat, with regulation gilt buttons, of same number and
placed as prescribed, the sleeves ornamented in same manner as full
dress uniform coats; an evening waistcoat of dark blue or white with
three small regulation buttons; also full dress trousers for all
officers except those of engineers, cavalry, artillery and infantry, who
wear dark blue trousers without stripes; patent leather shoes and full
dress cap; shoulder ornaments, etc., per regulations. For occasions of
special formality the u. for evening functions is the same as full dress
dismounted u.; and this may be worn at above described occasions at
discretion. On proper occasions, which are not official in character,
officers are permitted to wear civilian evening dress.

=Evening dress waistcoat=—a w. cut low to expose the shirt bosom, the
garment being most properly single-breasted, 3 or 4 buttons and 2
pockets, and the opening either V or U shape, with a shawl collar, which
is sometimes trimmed with a row of fancy braid. May be of black cloth to
match coat and trousers or of white wash fabrics or silk, which latter
may be plain or have a small figured pattern.

=Evening dress waistcoat=—(=navy=) similar to a civilian’s e. d. w., of
dark blue cloth with four small gilt navy buttons (or black silk buttons
for chaplains). The “white evening dress” w. to be of same style but of
duck or similar material (if for chaplains with white buttons). (=Marine
corps=) for all officers; of same material as corresponding mess jacket,
single-breasted with four small marine corps buttons, rolling collar.

=Evening jacket=—see Dinner j.

=Everlasting=—a cloth used for breeches during the latter part of the
18th century, mostly for servants’ wear.

=Examiner=—in the apparel trades one who closely scrutinizes finisht
garments for detection and correction of errors, flaws, etc. His
criticism, which is final, sometimes results in further changes.

=Exchange=—to receive back goods bought and give the purchaser something
else in the place thereof.

=Expenses=—the one thing that makes the boss sit up nights.

=Exposure test=—generally, exposing a piece of cloth or other material,
article or substance, to the weather, continuously for a number of days
(usually on a roof or in some place where it is not likely to be meddled
with) for determination of color, quality, etc.

=Express paid=—sent, not (?) at the receiver’s expense.

=Exquisite=—an ineffable clothes-wearing nuisance.

=Extension shoulders=—deceptivly broad.

=Extension tree=—a shoe t. having a spring, ratchet or other device for
stretching the shoe longitudinally.

=Extra=—a substitute or temporary clerk.

=Extra stout=—trade term for readymade garments designed to fit extra
corpulent or very fat persons.

=Extras=—anything or lots of things not contemplated in the price; the
“nigger-in-the-woodpile” reason for many low prices.

=Extract wool=—wool produced from waste or clips which are of mixt
wool-and-cotton, the wool being extracted by a process of carbonization.

=Extracted=—dyeing term indicating that patterns or designs in colors
differing from the general ground color, or in white, have been achieved
by (1) acid treatment, (2) bleaching, (3) tying and dyeing, (4)
mordanting, etc. See Batik, Bandanna, etc.

=Eye shield=—a silk or papier mache s. worn to protect weak eyes against
light; also to hide the effects of “somebody bumping into it the night
before.”

=Eyeglasses=—lenses suitably mounted for attachment to the bridge of the
nose, differing from spectacles in needing no bows across the temples or
behind the ears; pince nez.

=Eyeglass chain=—a safety device of gold or other metal.

=Eyeglass cord=—a light silk c. for attaching eye-glasses to the clothes
or person to prevent loss.

=Eyeglass holder=—a case for holding eye-glasses when not in use; of
various styles, as hinged, open-end, etc., usually of leather or
leather-covered metal.

=Eyelet=—a small hole, workt around with buttonhole stitching.

=Eyeshade=—a sort of visor for protecting the eyes from the glare of
strong light.


                                   F

=Face=—the right side or outer surface of a fabric or material.

=Face=—the table or (exposed) upper part of a brilliant cut diamond or
other precious stone.

=Face cloth=—a c. laid on the face of a dead person.

=Face cloth=—a wash c.

=Face finish=—meaning, in the textil trades, the manner in which the
face or outerside of a fabric is finisht; as clear f., doeskin f.,
unfinisht, etc., which see.

=Face guard=—a mask or covering worn by workers in chemical
laboratories; or by fencers, or baseball players, etc.

=Faced=—having an over or underlying strip of same or different material
for purposes of appearance or re-enforcement. See Facing.

=Faced cloth=—fabrics having a finisht face, as worsteds, in opposition
to fabrics such as tweeds, cheviots, etc.

=Facet=—one of the small triangular plane surfaces of a diamond or other
gem.

=Facing=—tailoring term for an underlying or overlying strip or
re-enforcement of material, the same as or different from that of the
garment, as (1) the strip along the inside of coat openings which also
form the face of the lapels or revers; (2) the strips of goods inside
the openings of pockets so that the eyes shall not be offended with
lining showing thru; (3) the covering of silk laid on lapels or revers,
to the edge or to the buttonholes; (4) the contra-colored cloth, showing
on the turned back skirts or revers of old-time military coats; (5) the
strip of cloth extending all around the inside edges of a waistcoat from
neck to bottom side seam, which is sometimes of undercollar cloth for
the sake of a thinner edge; and so forth.

=Faconne=—figured; usually employed in connection with fancy silks.

=Factory cotton=—unbleacht domestic cotton goods in contrast to those
which are imported.

=Factory yarn=—coarse, unscoured woolen y., used for knitting hose,
mittens, etc.

=Fad=—the current vogue; transient popularity.

=Fad=—a hobby.

=Faga=—a narrow strip or sash of silk wound several times around the
waist. (Spain).

=Faille Francaise=—a soft, lustrous silk fabric of wider cord than
gros-grain, but narrower than ottoman.

=Fair=—see Cotton classification.

=Fair shake=—a fair bargain.

=Fal lal=—any gaudy or trifling ornament or trinket; foppish frippery.

=Falding=—a kind of frieze, mentioned by Chaucer, approximating the
coarse red woolen stuff still worn by Irish peasant women for petticoats
and jackets.

=Fall bearer=—that part of broadfall trousers forming the front waist
band, and to which the fall or flap is buttoned; the b. also contains
the pockets. See Broadfalls. Compare Narrow falls.

=Fall down=—one of the old names for broadfalls (qv).

=Fall weight=—in the cloth trade suitings of 12 to 16 ounces and
overcoatings of 16 to 24 ounces are so known. Compare Winter w., Spring
w., Summer w., Tropical w.

=Falling band=—(1) a sort of wide turned down collar, usually of linen,
plain or ornamented, sometimes with floating ends or tabs; worn over the
neck of the doublet or jerkin of old days; (2) an ecclesiastical
neckdressing.

=Falling collar=—see Prussian c.

=False face=—what we begged pennies for when young.

=False hair=—someone else’s tho it covers your own bald spots.

=False teeth=—of great utilitarian value but, alack! also signs of
immoderate vanity.

=Family umbrella=—facetious term for old-fashioned extra large u.

=Fan=—once fops carried them; nowadays women.

=Fan=—the side of a cockt hat.

=Fancies=—any merchandise not classed as staples or regulars; novelties.

=Fancy back=—general term for fabrics having a pattern on the back or
underside differing from that on the face, as certain fancy
overcoatings, raincoatings, etc.

=Fancy dress ball=—an occasion where one can spend a good deal of money
on a costume that may never be worn again—unless he rents some trumpery
from a costumer, which nice folk are squeamish about doing.

=Fang=—a broken or protuberant tooth.

=Farmer’s satin=—properly a satin wove fabric having a cotton warp and
worsted filling, finisht with a high luster, used for coat linings,
etc.; also called Italian cloth.

=Fashion=—the prevailing mode.

=Fashion artist=—a perverse individual who has trances twice a year or
oftener for the benefit of clothing manufacturers and fashion journals.

=Fashion doll=—a device once extensivly used to display fashions in
miniature.

=Fashion monger=—one who affects scrupulous attention to fashion; a
dandy.

=Fashion-plate=—an engraving or other pictorial representation of the
prevailing fashions of any period.

=Fashion writer=—a has-been or going-to-be literary hack who need never
be taken seriously.

=Fashionable=—conforming to the prevailing mode; approved.

=Fashionable back width=—tailoring term indicating a change in
measurement of the back to correspond fashionably with width of
shoulder.

=Fashionable tailor=—one who gets the highest prices and who
consequently caters only to the wealthy classes; one to whom every
manufacturer of readymade clothing goes for his own clothes and for
ideas for his business.

=Fashionable waist=—tailoring term. See Waist.

=Fast color=—applied to colors supposed not to fade in washing or thru
exposure.

=Fast dye=—fast color; unfading.

=Fat man’s frock=—a cutaway frock coat, only the top button of which is
intended for use; also called “one button cutaway”.

=Fat man’s sack=—a sack coat made to be buttoned only at the top button,
and cut away slightly from that point downward.

=Fatigue blouse=—(=masonic=) a 5 button, single-breasted, straight front
sack coat, without pockets and with Prussian collar. Compare Commander’s
coat and Sir Knight’s coat.

=Fatigue coat=—(=army=) for enlisted men: a single-breasted sack c. of
brown cotton duck, of prescribed pattern.

=Fatigue trousers=—(=army=) for enlisted men: of brown cotton duck,
without stripes.

=Fatigue uniform=—(=army=) for enlisted men dismounted: worn on fatigue
or stable duty: f. coat, and trousers, service hat, russet leather
shoes.

=Favors=—more or less costly trivialities distributed at cotillons.

=Fay, to=—to fit. “Your coat fays well”. This obsolete form, a
curtailment of “fadge”, and in use during the Augustan age of English
literature, is occasionally encountered in New England.

=F. B. Q.=—proprietary name for a well-known make of ready-to-wear
clothing, meaning “finest beyond question”.

=Fearnought=—a heavy fulled woolen fabric used for sailors’ overcoats
and clothing; sometimes called Dreadnought.

Fearnought—(weaving term). See Mixing picker.

=Feather=—a channel about ⅛ inch deep, extending around the edges of a
shoe sole, along and into which holes for the stitches are pierced
obliquely.

=Feather top=—see Wig.

=Feathers=—when commingled with tar a punitiv form of clothing worn next
the body; occasionally met with in communities of zealously guarded
morality.

=Featherweight=—very light or summery.

=Fedora=—a soft felt hat, the crown having a crease in the center from
front to back. See Hombourg, Alpine, Tyrolean, etc.

=Feel=—see Handle.

=Fell=—felling is the act of sewing one piece of material onto another;
to turn in a seam.

=Fell=—archaic for hides or pelts; also used in the sense of hairy.

=Felled edge=—a variety of plain or blind e. (qv), hand-finisht, with a
felling stitch (qv), obtaining a perfectly plain surface.

=Felled pocket=—a jetted p.

=Fellers=—see Finishers.

=Felling, French=—see French f.

=Felling silk=—see Sewing s.

=Felling stitch=—an over-and-over continuous s. used to fasten linings
onto the outer body, to hold bindings to the edge, join under-collars to
body, etc., the closeness of the stitches being regulated according to
the purpose for which they are used.

=Fellmonger=—a trader in skins, furs, etc.

=Fellware=—skins, furs, etc.

=Felt=—properly a fabric made by interlocking or compacting wool, fur or
hair, or a mixture thereof, by rolling or pressure, without weaving,
often with the aid of glue and heat; used extensivly in garment
trimming, etc; also a woven fabric whose fibers are matted by shrinking
or otherwise.

=Felt shoes=—s. made out of felt, wholly or in part.

=Fencing glove=—a padded g., with a deep cuff or gauntlet.

=Fencing mask=—a wire m. for the face, so constructed as to be quickly
removable.

=Fencing plastron=—a padded and quilted leather or canvas chest and side
protector with a heart sewed on to jab at.

=Ferrandine=—an old-time cloth, similar to poplin, of silk or silk and
wool or silk and mohair, once used for waistcoats.

=Ferrule=—the metal end-tip of an umbrella rod or cane.

=Fez=—a brimless felt cap in the shape of a truncated cone, usually red
with a black tassel, worn especially by Turks and Shriners.

=Fibrilia=—a textil material made from the fibers of flax, jute, china
grass, hemp, etc., and used as a substitute for more valuable fibers;
used to a limited extent in the manufacture of hosiery, blankets, etc.,
in the proportion of 1 part to 3 of wool, cotton, etc.

=Fiddle=—tailoring term for supererogatory attentions toward a customer.

=Fiddleback=—irreverent name for the modern chasuble.

=Field belt=—(=army=) a b. of russet leather worn by enlisted men.

=Field breeches=—(=marine corps=) of khaki serge or drill, to match f.
coat, without stripe, welt or cord, loose above knees and about seat,
fitting closely below knees and extending to tops of shoes, fastening
with buttons and lacing or all lacing; seat re-enforced, suspender
buttons inside of band, 4 belt loops. For major general command and all
officers. White b. of same style may be worn by mounted officers in the
tropics when not on duty.

=Field coat=—(=marine corps=) for major general commandant and all other
officers, of khaki serge or drill, of the same design as the white
undress c. (qv) except without vent for sword, and with bronze buttons;
rank devices as for white c.; for non-commissioned officers, drummers,
trumpeters and privates, a single-breasted c. of 8 oz. khaki-colored
cotton material, cut half close, with standing collar, in length
reaching to the crotch and closed with 5 marine corps buttons, one
outside bellows-plait patch pocket, with flap in each breast, other
trimmings, details, etc., as prescribed.

=Field dress=—(=marine corps=) worn by all officers and men (1) in
garrison when prescribed by the commanding officer, or in the tropics;
(2) for duty under arms in garrison under foregoing conditions; (3) at
drills, target practice, maneuvers, and on marches when prescribed; (4)
in the field when prescribed; (5) when serving with marine battalions
afloat in the warm season or in the tropics, when prescribed. Consists
of, for all officers: f. coat, f. trousers or breeches, russet leather
puttees or leggings, f. hat and cord or white helmet, sword with undress
belt (leather slings) and knot, russet shoes; if mounted, spurs and drab
leather gloves; in the field, the flannel shirt prescribed for enlisted
men may be worn, in place of the f. coat, with rank devices on the
collar and with khaki scarf. For enlisted men: (in this case called f.
uniform): f. coat, f. trousers, leggings, f. hat, russet shoes, arms and
accouterments as ordered; in the field, the khaki shirt may be worn, in
place of the khaki coat, with a web belt.

=Field hat=—(=marine corps=)for non-commissioned officers, drummers,
trumpeters and privates, of felt, as sample in Quartermaster’s office;
worn creased from front to rear; ornaments, etc., of bronze, in front;
for all officers, of felt, the same as for enlisted men, creased from
front to rear, with a double cord of scarlet-and-gold with acorns at
ends; bronze corps device in front.

=Field stock=—same as stock or neck s.

=Field trousers=—(=marine corps=)for major general commandant and all
other officers, of same material as f. coat, without stripe, welt or
cord; may be worn without leggings in camp or garrison; for
non-commissioned officers, drummers, trumpeters and privates of same
material as coat and same pattern as white linen undress t.

=Field uniform=—see F. dress.

=Fielder’s glove=—a heavily padded, stout leather g., with a web
(connected) thumb, worn by baseball players.

=Fielder’s mitt=—about same as basemen’s m. (qv).

=Fifth avenue=—a street in New York city supposed to house the elite and
elect of tailordom in America; also specially mentioned for its Sunday
dress parades of the “smart set”, and particularly that of Easterday. A
name also prominently figuring on the window price tickets of misfit
shops.

=Fig leaf=—a primitiv and scanty form of makeshift garment invented by
Adam and Eve, the first garment makers of history, sufficiently
described by its name; now obsolete to the relief of the W. C. T. U., Y.
M. C. A., et al.

=Fighting gloves=—see Boxing g.

=Fil au Chinois=—name given to a well-known ball linen thread made in
France, waxt ready for use and of extra strength, for tailors,
shoemakers, dressmakers, leather-workers, etc.

=Fil au Tonkinois=—a stout sewing thread similar to fil au Chinois.

=Fil guipe=—a rolled or covered thread or cord of silk and tinsel,
usually with cotton center, used in manufacture of trimming laces, etc.

=Filature=—the delicate untwisted silk threads as reeled from the
cocoons, also called raw silk.

=File silk=—a fonetic corruption. See Faille Francaise.

=Filibeg=—the Highland kilt.

=Filled cloth=—general term for any woolen cloth that has been felted or
loaded with flocks (qv) for weight, body or strength—or cheapness.

=Filler cork=—ground c. mixt with rubber cement or some sticky substance
and used for filling in the hollow in the bottom of a shoe before the
outer sole is placed on or attacht to a shoe.

=Filler felt=—a piece of f. used instead of cork filler, for the same
purpose and in the same way.

=Filling=—the woof or weft threads of a woven fabric.

=Financial circles=—slang for dollars.

=Findings=—the required amounts of canvas, wigan, holland, tape, lining,
felt, haircloth, buttons, etc., necessary to a garment.

=Fine=—see Wool.

=Fine=—term used in connection with gold or bullion trimming braids,
indicating highest quality (in the sense, perhaps, that f. gold means
pure). An inferior quality is known as mi-fine.

=Fine as silk=—a simile of comparison, implying excellence.

=Fine cut=—a delectable preparation of nicotiana tabacum.

=Fine delaine=—wool classification term. See Wool.

=Fine-draw=—to sew and close up a rent, seam, etc., with fine thread and
delicate workmanship so that the joint is scarcely perceptible. See
next.

=Fine-drawing stitch=—a practically invisible s. employed when the
material is too thin or too ravelly for stoating or rentering, and for
mending tears. The edges are placed together, as in stoating, except
that they are not trimmed, the fray helping to cover the join. A fine
needle and fine silk must be used. The needle passes in and out,
catching the material lightly and without coming to the surface on the
right side, making very short stitches and purposely coming uneven
distances on either side of the join, distributing the strain, which
would be plainly visible were the distances even.

=Fine-tooth comb=—a search warrant. (Definition vulgar.)

=Finery=—gay apparel; gewgaws; good things to avoid.

=Finger cot=—a covering of leather, rubber, etc., for protection to
injured fingers.

=Finger guard=—(1) a protectiv shield of leather, rubber, etc., worn by
marksmen, sailmakers, corn huskers, etc.; (2) a f. cot or stall, or
protectiv covering, worn in case of accidents, by workers in chemicals,
etc.

=Finger ring=—something affording a fine chance for the display of one’s
bad taste; nowadays just a gaud; formerly of much significance.

=Finishers=—in clothing manufacture, expert needleworkers who fell-on or
“finish” the basted-on collars, sleeves, linings, etc.

=Finishing=—general term for any and all the processes of preparing
fabrics for market, as fulling, steaming, shearing, singeing,
calendering, glazing, inspecting, etc.

=Finishing=—a process in hat manufacture where, after blocking and
subsequent hydraulic pressure, stiff hats are placed upon wooden blocks
and by manipulation with pouncing paper, etc., are smoothed and
polished, and the brims trimmed to model dimensions.

=Fir wool=—see Pine w.

=Fire=—the interposition of Providence to (some) shopkeepers.

=Fire Department uniforms=—(=Chicago=) =Dress coat=: a double-breasted
close-fitting sack c. of dark blue cloth, made to button close to the
neck with combination lapel-rolling collar; of a length reaching to the
tips of the fingers, with 2 inside breast pockets, no outside pockets
but with a double-scalloped flap, as for a pocket, on each breast
outside; 2 buttons on each sleeve and with buttons on breast as follows:
marshal, 9 each breast, grouped in 3’s; assistant marshal and chiefs of
battalion, 8 each breast, in pairs; company officers, 4 each breast,
equidistant; firemen, same as for company officers, but no sleeve
buttons. =Fatigue coat=: a single-breasted square cut sack c. of dark
blue flannel, of same general specifications; vest and trousers to
match. =Overcoat=: a double-breasted frock coat of dark blue cloth, with
combination lapel-rolling collar, buttoning close to the neck, with same
number and arrangement of buttons as described under Dress c. except
that there are 5 on each breast, equidistant, for company officers and
men; the coat in length 2 inches below knee; all seams lapt, raw; the
skirt to be cut on the fold of the goods without opening, with 2 buttons
at waist seam and 2 on each side of skirt plaits; 1 outside breast and 2
outside skirt pockets with scallopt flaps; 1 inside breast pocket.
Insignia per regulations.

=Fire department uniforms=—(=New York=) =Dress coat=: a double-breasted
close-fitting sack c. of dark blue cloth, cut to button to the neck,
with rolling collar, and to reach midway between hip and knee, without
outside pockets but with 2 inside breast pockets, lining of red cloth or
flannel, 3 buttons on each sleeve and on the breast as follows: for
chief of department, 2 rows of 8, grouped in pairs; for deputy chief of
department and chiefs of battalion, same except spaced equidistant; for
company officers, 2 rows of 7, equidistant; for engineers of steamers
and men, a single-breasted squarecut c. with 6 buttons; in summer an
unlined c. of dark blue flannel; vest and trousers to match. =Overcoat=:
a double-breasted frock coat of dark blue cloth, reaching to the knee,
made to button close to the neck, with 2 rows of 8 buttons grouped in
pairs for chief of department and for all other officers and members 2
rows of 5 equidistant; the body and skirt to be lined with red cloth or
flannel; the skirt, which is open behind, trimmed with 2 rows of 3
buttons; 3 buttons on each sleeve; no outside pockets, but 1 inside
breast pocket. For officers attacht to fireboats, a double-breasted sack
overcoat, buttoning to neck with 5 buttons on each breast, spaced
equally; ulster collar; 2 circular outside breast pockets; length ⅔ of
knee; lined with red cloth. Insignia on coats as per regulation.

=Fire marshal’s dress coat=—see Fire department uniforms.

=Fire sale=—faky.

=Fire test=—see Flame t.

=Firemen’s cap=—(=New York=) a dark blue cloth cap of navy pattern, with
visor of black patent leather, with insignia of rank as prescribed by
regulations.

=Firemen’s dress coat=—see Fire department uniforms.

=Firemen’s fatigue coat=—see Fire department uniforms.

=Firemen’s hats=—(=New York=) for summer wear, a hat of Mackinaw straw,
white for all officers (except those attacht to fireboats), and brown
for all other members; sides 3¾ inches high, slightly tapering to crown;
black silk band.

=Firemen’s helmets=—(=New York=) for chief of department, deputy chiefs
and chiefs of battalion, a white helmet with 8 cones having a gilt front
depending from a gilt eaglehead and attacht thereto in front with
insignia of rank painted thereon in black and red, with title in black
letters on scroll of gold; for officers of engine and hook and ladder
companies, same, but of black with a white front, with insignia
variously differentiated; for engineers of steamers, an all-black helmet
with title and number black on white; for firemen of hook and ladder
companies, black with red front, with number, etc., in white.

=Firemen’s overcoat=—see Fire department uniforms.

=First pressing=—in clothing manufacture the operation of pressing-off a
garment, as a coat, preparatory to marking and sewing on buttons.
Compare Underpressing and After p.

=Fish=—a dart or V. See Dart.

=Fish bag=—see Live net.

=Fish-eye face=—trade name for pearl and other buttons having a slightly
rounded f. across which an oval slit is cut holding two holes to sew
thru.

=Fishing boot=—same as hunting b. (qv) without the hobnails.

=Fishing cape=—a plain c. of any waterproof material, worn as a
protection against rain.

=Fishing glove=—a g. of soft leather, loose fitting, with fingers cut
half length.

=Fishing hat=—almost any old thing with a wide brim; name sometimes
applied to a light muslin, wide brimmed h. on a wire frame.

=Fishing helmet=—a sort of storm hat.

=Fitters=—in clothing manufacture the workmen who inspect and assemble
the parts of garments as received from the cutting department.

=Fittings=—tailoring term for the necessary pieces of cloth for facings,
pocket welts, etc. Compare Findings.

=Flambustious=—showy; gaudy; or good; as “we will have a flambustious
time”. If this word is derived from “flam”, a lie or cheat, a certain
transition of meaning has occurred.

=Flame tests=—pure dye silk will shrivel up immediately where flame is
applied, leaving a dull leaden color without fire; weighted silk retains
flame after match is removed and may either shrivel or burn up; cotton
or other substitute or adulterant, except wool, will burn until
consumed; wool chars much like silk.

=Flanging=—a process in hat manufacture subsequent to curling, binding
and trimming, whereby further and final shape is given to the brims.

=Flannel=—(1) general name for a large variety of soft finisht all-wool
fabrics, usually loosely woven of coarse lightly twisted yarns and but
very slightly fulled, tho commonly well teasled. For men’s wear
generally a very superior grade, of twill weave, fulled to a degree
resembling cheviot. See also Mackinaw f., Navy twills, Shirting f.,
Shaker f., Baby f., etc.; (2) weaving term for undyed cloths and suiting
fabrics as they come from the loom and before they reach the dye vat.

=Flannelette=—a stout half-cotton or all-cotton flannel-like fabric,
loom figured and close napt. See Outing cloth.

=Flannels=—colloquial for (1) summer outing suits (usually coat and
trousers) of flannel, properly in white or light colorings; and (2) for
winter woolen undergarments.

=Flap=—a limber hanging part; a covering for pockets in garments.

=Flap=—the shield or falling front part of front fall trousers.

=Flap-pad=—see Pad and Looney.

=Flapped pocket=—a p. with a flap over its opening. Compare Welted p.

=Flare=—an outward spreading or widening, as of the skirts of a coat.

=Flashy=—showy, meretricious.

=Flask funnel=—a device to assist you in not wasting it.

=Flat back=—tailor’s term for a man over-erect with a narrow back and
full chest.

=Flat bound=—in tailoring an edge finish obtained by the use of a wide
silk or other braid laid widely on the face or outer surface and but
narrowly underneath and over the edge, then stitcht onto the two surface
edges and prest, obtaining a flattened effect.

=Flat braid=—formed by a number of threads laid zigzag and crossing each
other alternately over and under. See Silk b.

=Flat button=—not hollowed, or rounded, or shaped in any way—a general
term.

=Flat buttonhole=—see Satin b.

=Flat foot=—needing an arch support (qv).

=Flat goods=—trade term for hosiery, underwear, etc., not soft ribbed or
fashioned.

=Flat iron=—trade term for a style in shoes popular several years ago,
quite pointed at the toe but widening sharply to the ball of the foot,
resembling a flat iron in shape, hence name.

=Flat last=—trade term for shoes with the soles resting flat on the
ground. Compare Rocking l.

=Flat seam=—see Pique s.

=Flat set=—hatter’s term for very flat hat brims.

=Flax comb=—a hatchel.

=Fleece=—see Wool.

=Flesher=—one who fleshes hides.

=Fleshers=—trade name for split glove skins as received from abroad.

=Fleshing=—a process in the curing and dressing of furs and leather:
removing the flesh and fat from the skin.

=Fleshings=—properly, flesh-colored tights; loosely, tights in general,
particularly if liberally exhibiting the anatomy.

=Fleuret silk=—same as Spun s.

=Float=—in weaving, the passage of a filling thread under or over
several warp threads without being engaged by them.

=Flock=—short refuse or finely powdered wool waste or dust used in
finishing cheap woolens. (Flocks.) See Extract wool.

=Floorwalker=—a smooth gentleman, hired to add dignity to a store, who
directs you to some place you did not ask for.

=Florentine=—(1) a heavy silk fabric, woven figured or plain twilled,
chiefly used for waistcoats; (2) a worsted waistcoating material; (3) a
twilled cotton fabric for summer trousers.

=Floret=—trade term for the longest and finest fibers of spun silk (qv)
after carding. (=Fleuret.=)

=Florist=—a shopkeeper with whom young dandies become intimate before
marriage and forget afterward.

=Flossy=—giddy, foppish, fussy, affected (perhaps both in brain and
apparel).

=Flower buttonhole=—see Lapel b.

=Flunky=—(1) liveried man-servant; (2) a toady.

=Flush=—to float or pass weft threads over several warp threads, as in
twill and satin weaving.

=Flushing coat=—something worn about 1825, but not identified.

=Fly=—a placket for closing or fastening together sides or parts of a
garment, as of an overcoat or trousers, so as to conceal the buttons or
other means of fastening. Specially designated as blind f., box f.,
French f., open f. (qv).

=Fly coat=—a long jacket reaching about half way to the knees, worn
previous to the Revolution.

=Fly front=—tailoring term for coats made with an arrangement for
concealing the buttons or other fastenings; a sort of placket of which
the underpart engages the buttons, hooks, etc. Trousers also are f.-f.
(except front falls).

=Fob=—(1) a pendant attachment to a watch, usually of silk, with gold
buckle, slide, ring, seal or other ornament; an article of jewelry most
variously made; (2) a watch pocket in a trousers waistband.

=Fob pocket=—see Watch p.

=Fob ribbon=—heavy, close-woven, plain edged gros-grain or fine ribbed
faille silk r. made especially for watch fobs.

=Fold-back cuffs=—shirt c., usually attacht to the garment, made double
or folded backward. Also called French c.

=Folded collar=—a double or folded-over shirt c., usually high banded.

=Folded cuffs=—see Fold-back c.

=Folding cane=—a walking stick with a concealed joint at about half its
length, to enable it to fold and be carried in a suit case or grip.

=Fool’s cap=—a conical paper c. worn penitentially by the school cut-up.

=Foot bath=—a vessel for bathing the feet.

=Foot boy=—a boy in livery; a page.

=Foot cloth=—(1) a cloth or carpet to walk upon on occasions of
ceremony; (2) a deep housing or state caparison for a horse; a sumptor
c.

=Footease=—proprietary name for a powder to “shake into your shoes” as a
fetich against walking aches.

=Foot-form=—shoes constructed on anatomical or foot-fitting lasts;
orthopedic; waukenphast (qv).

=Foot glove=—a heavy, coarse woolen or felt oversock, worn over shoes
while driving, etc., for warmth.

=Foot hawker=—a peripatetic peddler; a tray or pushcart merchant.

=Foot-mantle=—see Safeguard.

=Foot muff=—a muffler; a fur bag for the feet.

=Foot powder=—a chemical preparation shaken into the shoes for relieving
perspiration, aches, odors, etc.

=Foot scraper=—see Shoe s.

=Foot-sheet=—a square or oblong cloth laid upon floor or chairs for
invalids to sit upon during toilet, changing of bedding, etc.

=Foot-stone=—a small memorial tablet at the foot of a grave.

=Foot-straps=—the buckled straps used to hold down the pantaloons and
trousers of the early part of the last century.

=Foot-warmer=—any contrivance for warming the feet in carriages, in bed,
etc., as (1) a muff, (2) a metal container having slow-burning
cartridges of carbon; (3) a hot brick; (4) a hot-water bottle; (5) an
electric warming pad; (6) a night policeman’s club.

=Football jacket=—a sort of stout canvas cuirass, armless, laced up the
front.

=Football leg guards=—see Shin g.

=Football mouthpiece=—protective chewing gum for scrimmages.

=Football pads=—quilted leather p. for elbows and shoulders, worn inside
the jersey or sweater.

=Football pants=—knickerbockers of canvas, khaki, etc., padded, quilted,
and sometimes with reed guards sewed into the upper leg.

=Football shoe=—a s. laced well down towards toes with ankle-padding,
and spikes or cleats on soles.

=Footgear=—shoes and so forth.

=Foothold=—a light skeleton overshoe of rubber protecting the fore-sole,
but without heel, kept on by a heel strap.

=Footman’s livery=—house dress: footman’s coat, valencia or plush
waistcoat, trousers, shoes, white tie; or court l. (qv); on the
carriage, he should wear the second man’s l.

=Fop=—cross between dandy and dude.

=Forage cap=—a small, low cloth c. with a peak, once worn by officers
and men (U. S. A.) when not in dress uniform.

=Forchet=—old spelling of fourchette (qv).

=Forelock=—a lock of hair growing over the forehead.

=Forepart=—that part of a coat or vest covering the chest.

=Forest wool=—a textil fiber made from pine needles treated with a soda
solution, and otherwise manipulated, spun and woven into a resemblance
of coarse wool, and manufactured on a considerable scale into blankets
and clothing of the cheaper grades, said to be warm and durable; called
wald wolle in Germany, where best known. Compare Xylolin.

=Forester’s uniform=—(=Forestry service=) material a brownish green
woolen or cotton khaki as adopted by the army; coat a combination of the
army officer’s coat and a business sack coat, fitting snugly about chest
but rather loosely about hips and waist, with blouse (Prussian) collar,
2 outside buttoned bellowsed pockets and bronze buttons of the service;
vest optional (?); trousers either ordinary or cavalry style riding
breeches; shirt of gray flannel with 2 buttoned breast pockets; hat of
light-colored felt, similar to army service hat; riding boots or
leggings should be worn with riding breeches and high-topt, heavy shoes,
preferably of surveyor’s or hunting pattern, with trousers; gloves of
buckskin, short or army gauntlet pattern; overcoat same as uniform
material but heavier, double-breasted, ankle length, with deep riding
vent, 2 inside and 2 outside vertical pockets, broad collar.

=Forestry cloth=—a twill woven, clear-finisht worsted fabric of standard
olive-drab color, made in several weights for suitings, coatings,
shirtings, etc. Adopted by the government for the forestry service.

=Fork=—the os coccygis; the crotch.

=Form=—tone, smartness, propriety, stylishness, carriage, appearance,
demeanor.

=Form=—a model or dummy for trying on or displaying any article of
apparel or other merchandise.

=Form fitting=—following the lines of the body closely.

=Forming=—a process in hat manufacture wherein the fur is attracted to a
perforated fan by air-suction, then covered with cloths and dipped in
warm water and afterward “hardened” by careful manipulation and rolling
to make the fibers knit together.

=Forward stock=—the merchandise actually before the customer. Compare
Reserve s.

=Foulard=—properly a light-weight silk fabric, woven plain or twilled,
printed with an all-over pattern, the designs of which are white or
color of the fabric, the background solid color.

=Fountain pen=—doubtless invented to spoil waistcoats.

=Four-cornered cap=—see Mortarboard.

=Four hole=—trade term for buttons pierced with 4 holes or eyes.

=Four hundred=—McAllisterian thaumaturgy.

=Fourchette=—the inner sides of glove fingers. If you will examine a
glove it will be seen that it is cut all of one piece with the exception
of the thumb and the fourchettes, for which the remaining fragments of
the skin are used.

=Four-in-hand=—a long necktie narrow where it goes around the collar but
with widened ends, tied in a sailor knot.

=Fownes=—trade diminutive for the general line of gloves made by Fownes
Bros. & Co., London.

=Fox=—a piece of leather applied over the upper leather of a shoe, next
to the sole, either for ornament or repair. See Foxed.

=Fox=—a canine mammal whose pelt is highly esteemed for winter garments.

=Fox tail=—see Wig.

=Foxt=—a word usually used as f. quarter, f. top or upper. Foxt
designates a peculiar pattern or style for the upper of a shoe.

(=Foxed.=) See Fox.

=Frame=—the metal ribs of an umbrella.

=Frame made=—trade term for fabric gloves knitted without seams.

=Frameless spectacles=—s. (qv) without frame or rim around the lenses.

=Frangipanni=—a perfume derived from or imitating the odor of the (West
Indian) red jasmin.

=Franklin avenue=—a street in St. Louis having a number of small cheap
clothing shops (compare South street and Halstead street); a local
synonym for cheap clothing.

=Fray=—to ravel, to loosen; employed in describing cloth too soft or too
loosely woven to hold stitches in a raw edge or seam.

=Freak=—anything monstrous, extreme in style, vulgarly ostentatious; a
senseless innovation; outre.

=French back=—trade term for a soft-twilled woolen backing of different
weave from the face, formed on the underside of clear-finisht worsteds,
as trouserings, and other fabrics, with the object of increasing weight
or stability without adding appreciably to the cost, or as a means of
reducing cost.

=French back=—an overcoat (a modification of a Chesterfield) with a
graceful shapely back and a long center vent usually reaching to the
waist line, the side seams to the waist line being commonly French prest
inverted plaits; made to button in front with a fly or to button thru as
in a body coat.

=French calf=—indicating calfskin shoe leather produced by (1) a
particular and standard method of tanning or finishing; (2) a c. skin
tanned and finished in France.

=French cambric=—a very fine quality of cambric used for handkerchiefs,
etc.

=French coney=—imitation sealskin.

=French cuffs=—see Fold-back c.

=French edge=—in leather goods manufacture, as luggage, an edge seamed
outwardly, sewn thru and thru; “cobbler sewed”.

=French facing=—the inside cloth facing of a coat, so cut as to extend
around the armholes.

=French fall=—see Falling band.

=French falls=—the top boots of the XVI. century, having wide, flaring
tops that were turned down and then turned up again; also known as
bucket tops.

=French felling=—in tailoring a method of holding two pieces of material
together, as the forepart and the facing of an edge. The parts to be
joined are laid flat, edges even, right sides within. The needle is past
straight thru, at right angles with the edge and close to it from
underneath, upwards. The goods are then turned right side out and the
edge finisht with stitching as desired, the felling being intended to
hold the edge and prevent raveling.

=French fly=—see Blind f.

=French foot=—trade term for hosiery made with a single seam in the
center of the sole. See English f.

=French neck=—(1) in tailoring, meaning a finish given to the back of
the neck of a waistcoat by means of a double strip of lining material
instead of the cloth from which the garment is made, for purposes of
thinness, permitting the coat collar to set closer to the shirt c.; (2)
in underwear, a crocheted instead of a welted or seamed n.

=French percale=—see Percale.

=French prest=—tailoring term applied usually to seams that are sharply
prest; as, the skirts of dress and frock coats; inverted plaits in sack
and overcoats. (F. pressed.)

=French seal=—“electric” seal; imitation.

=French seams=—first sewed outside out, then turned in and sewed again,
so that the edges of the seam are concealed.

=French serge=—a fine twilled, closely woven s.

=French sizes=—name given to various peculiar methods of designating the
sizes of shoes by stamping numerals or letters on the inside lining of
the shoe. See Appendix.

=French system=—weaving term for worsted yarns spun on mules, usually
from shorter staple than required for the Bradford s. (qv), well adapted
for soft-faced goods and velour finishes.

=French toe=—in shoemaking, a wide, plain t. without cap.

=French waist=—trade term for trousers made without a sewed-on
waistband.

=French yarns=—worsted y. combed dry, without oil, resulting in a fairly
fuzzy or wooly strand, but which, however, is less liable to shrink than
y. spun by the English system. Compare English y.

=Fribble=—a trifling or frivolous affectation or fad.

=Fried egg=—a low flat hat.

=Friend=—a borrower.

=Frieze=—a thick, stout, double-woven, napt woolen overcoating, woven of
long fleece doubled after spinning, thoroly fulled after weaving and
slightly felted until waterproof and windproof, and finisht with a long,
unsheared shaggy nap. Said to have originated in Friesland, whence name,
but better known thru the Irish or near-Irish varieties.

=Fright wig=—general term for any monstrosity in the (theatrical) wig
line.

=Frill=—an ornamental strip of material gathered at the attacht edge,
the other edge being free; a flounce; a ruffle.

=Frills=—affected airs or manners in dress or ornament; fopperies.

=Frippery=—tawdry finery.

=Frize holland=—a superior grade of fine bleacht Holland linen, once
used largely for shirts, etc.

=Frock-Chesterfield=—a single-breasted, fly-front overcoat, with a waist
seam, a three-seam back as in a frock coat, and with skirts without
plaits (1907).

=Frock coat=—properly a c. either single or double-breasted, constructed
of parts known as forepart (which in double-breasted coats is divided at
the front line of the chest), sidebody, divided backpart and skirt, of
each 2, the backparts continuing down to the bottom, joining with the
skirt parts and forming the plaits behind, in which pockets are
sometimes placed; when the skirts in front are cutaway from a point near
the waistline the word cutaway is prefixt to distinguish from the more
formal garment, “Prince Albert”, as the double-breasted f. is commonly
known; the “cutaway frock” (of which the [English] walking c. is a
variation) is almost invariably single-breasted and consequently not
made with divided foreparts.

=Frock coat=—(=navy=) for all officers, a c. similar in cut to a
civilian’s f. c., but of dark blue cloth, double-breasted, with 2 rows
of large navy buttons, 9 each, buttoning on the six lower buttons; the
sleeves, collar and shoulders bearing the insignia prescribed for the
rank of the wearer.

=Frocking=—coarse cotton jean; drilling; dungaree; fustian.

=Frog=—an ornamental cloak or coat button or fastening of silk or wool
crocheted or braided in various fancy forms.

=Frog=—(1) an old term for a seaman’s coat or frock; (2) a leather
pocket or case for a pistol, bayonet or cutlass.

=Front=—a one-word epigram for appearance—clothes, manners, etc.

=Front facing=—in coat and vest making the strip of goods forming the
inside forepart or edge of the garment.

=Front-falls=—trousers not made with a single fly-opening, but with a
wide front flap, buttoning on both sides.

=Frosts=—spiked soles for walking on ice (early 18th century).

=Fudge wheeling=—an ornamental process in the finishing of the edges of
shoe soles.

=Full-baste=—tailoring term for a coat or other garment ready for try-on
with every seam basted, instead of some of the seams being sewed up.

=Full bellows tongue=—a tongue in a laced shoe, attacht to both sides of
the tops of the shoe at the opening and filling completely this opening.

=Full bottom=—see Wig.

=Full box=—lingo for a very loose effect in overcoats.

=Full chested=—bulgy.

=Full dress=—see Evening d.

=Full dress=—(=army=) the prescribed uniform worn on state occasions at
home and abroad; when receiving or calling upon the President or upon
the ruler or member of royal family of other countries; and at
ceremonies and entertainments when it is desirable to do special honor
to the occasion, or when f. d. is prescribed for enlisted men. For
general officers, dismounted; f. d. coat and trousers, chapeau,
epaulets, sash, white gloves, f. d. belt, saber, black shoes; same,
mounted: f. d. coat, dress breeches, f. d. cap, shoulder knots, sash,
drab leather gloves, f. d. belt, saber, black boots, spurs; officers of
staff corps and departments: officers of cavalry, artillery, infantry
and engineers, dismounted: f. d. coat and trousers, f. d. cap, white
gloves, f. d. belt, saber, black shoes, and aigulets and shoulder belts
for those authorized to wear them; same, mounted: f. d. coat, dress
breeches, f. d. cap, drab leather gloves, f. d. belt, black boots,
spurs; aigulets and shoulder belts as authorized; chaplains, dismounted:
f. d. coat and trousers, chaplain’s hat, white gloves, black shoes;
same, mounted: f. d. coat, dress breeches, drab leather gloves, black
boots, spurs, chaplain’s hat; for enlisted men, worn at reviews,
parades, and other ceremonies under arms, unless otherwise prescribed;
dismounted: dress coat, with breast cord, dress trousers, dress cap,
black shoes, white gloves, russet leather belt and cartridge box;
mounted: dress coat with breast cord, dress breeches, dress cap,
leggings, russet leather shoes, drab leather gloves, spurs, saber belt,
and cartridge box (when prescribed).

=Full dress=—(=navy=) worn on ceremonial occasions such as making or
exchanging visits with officers of flag rank, foreign officials, etc.,
and on ceremonies and entertainments where “dress” is not sufficient.
Consists of—for all commissioned officers, except chaplains, chief
boatswains, chief gunners, chief carpenters and chief sailmakers: f. d.
trousers, cockt hat, epaulets, sword and f. d. belt, scarf, white
gloves, medals and badges; for the officers excepted above and for
warrant officers, mates and clerks, the same as “Undress A”, and for
midshipmen, the same as prescribed for commissioned officers,
substituting the blue cap for the cockt hat and shoulder knots for
epaulets.

=Full dress=—(=marine corps=) to be worn by officers on occasions of
ordinary ceremony, such as usual reviews, inspections, street parades,
etc.; by enlisted men on occasions of ceremony when officers appear in
special f. d. or f. d. uniform, and when ordered by commanding officer;
and by members of the band on occasions of parades or reviews when
officers appear in special f. d. or f. d. uniform and when ordered by
commanding officer. Consists of—for major general commanding: f. d.
coat, f. d. or white trousers, chapeau, f. d. cap or white helmet, sash,
sword with f. d. belt and knot, shoulder knots, white gloves, black
shoes, white standing collar (or, when mounted, dark blue riding
breeches, drab leather gloves, black boots with spurs); for officers of
the line: a similar uniform except no chapeau or sash; for officers of
staff: a similar uniform except aigulets instead of shoulder knots, no
chapeau or sash; for enlisted men (including non-commissioned officers,
drummers and trumpeters): f. d. coat, blue or white trousers, f. d. cap
or white helmet, white gloves, black leather shoes, arms and
accouterments as ordered; for leader, drum-major and all members of
band: f. d. coat, blue or white trousers, special f. d. cap or white
helmet (shako for drum-major only), epaulets (leader only), shoulder
knots, aigulets (except for drum-major) sword with f. d. knot and belt,
(leader only) white gloves, black leather shoes, accouterments as
ordered.

=Full dress=—(=revenue cutter service=) worn by officers on occasions of
special ceremony and quarterly muster on board vessels of first and
second rate; first visits to commanders of war vessels and military
posts, parades of ceremony, etc.; consists of frock coat, plain dark
blue trousers, epaulets, chapeau, sword, f. d. belt and sword knot.

=Full dress belt=—for naval officers of the rank of rear admiral and
higher, of dark blue cloth with gold stripes of prescribed widths and
with blue cloth sling straps likewise decorated; for commissioned
officers, with certain exceptions, of dark blue silk webbing, with woven
gold stripes.

=Full dress breeches=—(=marine corps=) for all mounted officers, of same
material, and with same stripes, as f. d. trousers cut as prescribed for
field b.; worn with black boots and spurs.

=Full dress cap=—(=army=) for all officers, a c. of dark blue cloth,
with drooping visor of black patent leather and a flat gold cap-strap,
with bands of gold lace and velvet and insignia according to rank.

=Full dress cap=—(=marine corps=) of fine dull finisht dark blue cloth,
the sides 3¾ in. deep in front and 3½ in. in back, the top flat and
slightly oval and flaring out slightly, the visor dropt at an angle of
about 60° from the horizontal. For major general commandant, having a
band of dark blue velvet 1¾ in. wide, embroidered all around with gold
oak leaves, the visor covered with dark blue cloth, the top trimmed with
loops of narrow gold soutache braid, and otherwise finisht and decorated
as prescribed. For all other officers, the same, except the band is of
gold lace; the visor for officers of line and staff to be ornamented
with gold thread, and for company officers and captains in the staff of
plain black patent leather; for non-commissioned officers, drummers,
trumpeters and privates, a similar c., but with a band of scarlet cloth
lapseamed to blue sides, red worsted soutache ornament on top of c.;
other details per specifications; for leader of the band, second leader
and musicians, same as prescribed for special full dress. For
drum-major, a shako of black lambskin, 8½ in. high in front, 10 in. high
in back, plain red cloth top and red cloth bag trimmed with gold
soutache braid, gilt chin strap form under chin, and 12 in. red, white
and blue vulture feather plume on right side.

=Full dress coat=—(=army=) a double-breasted frock c. of dark blue cloth
with a standing collar, 2 gilt buttons at back of waist and 1 near the
end of each plait behind; the skirt to extend from one-half to
three-quarters of the distance from hip to knee. For general officers:
collar and cuffs of blue-black velvet; for other officers, collar of
same material as c., no cuffs. Buttons in front: for general, 2 rows of
12, placed by 4’s; lieutenant general, 2 rows of 10, placed 3 upper and
lower, 4 in middle; major general, 2 rows of 9, placed by 3’s; colonel,
lieutenant colonel and major, 2 rows of 9, spaced equally; captain,
first and second lieutenants, 2 rows of 7 equally spaced. For chief of
engineers, same as for general officers, except that a piping of scarlet
velvet appears on upper and outer edges of lapels, continuing down the
edges of the coat to bottom of skirt and from top of back flaps to
bottom of skirt, with a skirt facing of scarlet velvet; for other
officers of engineer corps, similar piping and facing, but of scarlet
cloth. For all officers, sleeve, collar and shoulder ornaments as
prescribed by regulation.

=Full dress coat=—(=marine corps=) for major general commandant and all
line officers, a double-breasted frock c. of dark blue cloth, in length
1 in. below crotch, with standing collar, 2 rows of large marine corps
buttons wider apart at top than at bottom (9 placed in 3’s for major
general commandant, 8 equidistant for other officers), 2 pockets in
skirt folds, collars and cuffs with trimmings prescribed for rank of
wearer. For officers of staff, a single-breasted tunic of dark blue
cloth, in length 1 in. below crotch, with closed skirt behind, trimmed
as for line officers, but without pockets, standing collar, and with
trimmings as prescribed; aigulets and shoulder knots with f. d. and
special f. d. For non-commissioned officers and privates, a
single-breasted tunic of dark blue cloth, reaching 1 in. below crotch, 8
large marine corps buttons in front and 2 in back at end of waist seam,
standing collar, the coat piped down front, around the bottom and up the
plaits of the skirt to waist seam with ⅛ in. scarlet cloth; scarlet
shoulder straps and sleeve bands and other details as prescribed. For
drummers and trumpeters, a c. of the same style, except that it is of
scarlet cloth with white piping, black collar, black shoulder straps and
black sleeve bands, these straps piped with white; for leader of the
band, a tunic of dark blue cloth, same patterns as prescribed for staff
officers, except: the breast trimmed across with ⅛ in. gold tubular
braid and 3 rows of marine corps buttons, 7 each row; cuffs trimmed as
prescribed for first lieutenant without the scarlet backing. For second
leader of band, a f. d. c. of scarlet cloth, made as prescribed for
enlisted men of the line, except: the collar of black broadcloth piped
with white; front and bottom edges and back of skirt plaits to waist
piped with white; front trimmed across with black mohair braid (in the
same manner as undress c. of officers) and with 3 rows of marine corps
buttons, 7 each. For musicians of band, same as for second leader,
except: with pointed cuffs of black broadcloth. For drum-major, same as
prescribed, for second leader, except: collar of scarlet cloth trimmed
with gold lace and piped with white cloth, breast trimmed with ½ in.
gold tubular braid, pointed cuffs, outlined with ½ in. gold tubular
braid. Other details per regulations.

=Full dress coat=—(=navy=) for bandsmen a single-breasted tunic of
scarlet cloth, buttoned to the neck with 8 gilt buttons, standing
collar, the front edges, bottom and skirt plaits (to waist seam) piped
with white cloth, no outside pockets, shoulder decorations as
prescribed.

=Full dress frock coat=—(=revenue cutter service=) for all commissioned
officers: of dark navy-blue cloth, double-breasted, buttoning to the
neck, rolling collar, 2 rows of service buttons on breast, 9 each side,
spaced equidistant, full skirts extending nearly to the knee, trimmings,
attachments, etc., as prescribed.

=Full dress saber belt=—see Saber b.

=Full dress shirt=—see Evening d. s.

=Full dress sword belt=—(=marine corps=) for all officers and leader of
the band, of 1½ in. marine corps gold lace with a ³⁄₁₆ in. stripe of
scarlet silk thru the center, white leather lining, showing edges, ⅛ in.
Slings of same material and design.

=Full dress trousers=—see Evening d. t.

=Full dress trousers=—(=army=) for general officers, of dark blue cloth
with 2 stripes of gold wire lace mounted on velvet, of the color of coat
collar, along outer seams; for chief of engineers, the interval between
the stripes of scarlet velvet; for officers of staff corps and
departments (except engineers) 1 stripe of gold lace; for officers of
engineer corps, stripes of scarlet cloth with white piping; for officers
of cavalry, artillery and infantry, of sky-blue cloth with 1½ in.
stripes, welted at the edges, of the colors of the facings of their
respective corps or arms, except that for infantry the stripes are
white; for chaplains, of plain black or dark blue cloth, without stripe,
welt or cord.

=Full dress trousers=—(=navy=) of dark blue cloth with a stripe of gold
lace covering the outseam of each leg.

=Full dress trousers=—(=marine corps=) for major general commandant and
all staff officers, of dark blue cloth, cut with medium spring, side
pockets, outseams trimmed with 1¼ in. black mohair braid. For line
officers, same as Special f. d. For non-commissioned officers, of
sky-blue kersey, outseams finisht with 1 in. stripe of welted edge
scarlet cloth. For privates, the same without the scarlet stripes. For
drummers and trumpeters, the same except that the outseams have a ³⁄₁₆
in. scarlet welt; for leader of the band, same as prescribed for line
officer’s special f. d. For second leader and musicians, same as
prescribed for privates, except: with 2½ in. stripes of scarlet cloth
down outer seams, stitcht on the outer edges, showing ¼ in. of light
blue between. For drum-major, same as prescribed for other
non-commissioned officers.

=Full dress uniforms=—(=army, navy, marine corps, etc.=) see Full d., et
var.

=Full dress waistcoat=—see Evening d. w.

=Full fashioned=—general term for hosiery, etc., produced on automatic
knitting machines, made in flat strips or patterns and then joined,
either by machine or by hand. See F. regular.

=Full feather=—in full dress; attired in one’s best clothes.

=Full fig=—(nautical) full dress.

=Full frock=—the double-breasted frock coat, or “Prince Albert”.

=Full-headed=—tailoring term, meaning having fine plaits or puckers of
material in the upper part, as a sleeve; not skimpt; more liberal than
usual; specially, a joining of sleeve and shoulder so that top of sleeve
head shows up full. See Sleeve head.

=Full peg=—tailoring term for extra baggy trousers, commonly predicativ
of college fledglings. See P. top and Half p.

=Full regular=—trade term for hosiery and underwear in which the seams
are made by hand knitting instead of by machine; the most expensiv
grade.

=Full Scotch=—see Scotch edge.

=Full skeleton=—tailoring term for coats made without lining. Compare
Half s.

=Full uniform=—the complement of costume, ornaments, arms, etc.,
prescribed for officers and men in the military and naval service on
inspection, parade and ceremonial occasions. See Full dress, Special
full dress, etc.

=Full vamp=—shoemaking term for vamps where the toes are not cut away
under the tips. See Whole v., et var.

=Fulled=—made thicker and more compact by shrinking.

=Fuller’s earth=—a species of non-plastic clay used as an absorbent of
grease and oil and as a cleansing agent; also used in fulling cloth.

=Fulling=—the process of cleansing and condensing (or shrinking) woolen
and worsted goods to render them stronger and firmer. See encyclopedia.

=Fulling gum=—a substance used for preparing warps for weaving.

=Fur beaver=—a long-napt cloth imitating fur.

=Fur felt=—hatter’s term for f. (and hats thereof) made from the fur of
nutria, beaver, coney or other fur-bearing animals.

=Fur seal=—the “sealskin de luxe”, being of much finer texture than wool
s. and correspondingly more valuable. Found in Alaska, Shetland Islands,
Lobos Island, etc., the former being of the most uniform excellence. The
hide of this variety is seldom, if ever, used for leather.

=Furbelow=—(1) a plaited or puckered flounce; (2) broadly, redundant or
superfluos finery or ornament.

=Furrier=—(1) a dealer in or maker of fur goods and garments; (2) a fur
dresser.

=Furrier’s knife=—a flat piece of steel, having the general outlines of
a rhomb, one edge of which is sharpened, the opposite edge or top being
concaved to form a handle.

=Furs=—familiar term for fur outergarments.

=Fuscous=—dusky; grayish brown, tawny.

=Fussy=—fancy, effeminate, meretricious.

=Fustian=—(1) formerly a kind of stout cloth made of cotton and flax;
(2) now a coarse twilled linen or cotton fabric; (3) corduroy and
similar fabrics are also so-called.


                                   G

=G-string=—an aboriginal modesty-bit.

=Gabardine=—a cloak-like garment worn by Russian Jews; usually made of
black cloth, silk or moire; it is buttoned down front to waist, whence
it hangs to the ankles.

=Gabardine=—a close-woven, fine twilled waterproof cotton cloth for
sporting and motor wear. Probably a blind name.

=Gag=—investiture for the mouth, of any sufficient model, style, or
material, worn at discretion when the alternativ might be hurtful,
usually applied by burglars who object to raucous cacophony.

=Gaiter=—(1) a cloth or leather covering for the leg or ankle; a
spatterdash or overgaiter; (2) a shoe without opening, but elastic gores
at the sides. See Congress g.

=Gaiter bottoms=—tailoring term for trousers cut snug at the ankle and
extending out covering the instep with strap fastening beneath the foot.

=Gaiter trousers=—just described (vs).

=Galashiels=—a town in Scotland famous for its tweeds known by that
name.

=Galatea=—(1) a striped worsted suiting faintly suggestiv of Bedford
cord; (2) a stout striped cotton fabric, used for shirts, pinafores,
etc.

=Gallant=—(1) a (good or bad) man who pays court or markt attention to
women; (2) a beau; (3) a man of showy or ostentatious attire.

=Galligaskins=—(1) wide hose or trousers formerly worn by seamen; (2)
leather leggings. See Venetians.

=Galloon=—general term for various kinds of worsted, silk or tinsel lace
or decorativ braid used on uniforms, etc.

=Galloon-gallant=—contemptuous for an over-decorated fop.

=Galloway=—a breed of cattle raised in Scotland, noted for the softness
and excellence of their glossy black hair; the skins are used for fur
coats, lap robes, etc.

=Gallows=—an early name for what we now call suspenders, modernly
corrupted to “galluses”.

=Galluses=—suspenders. See Gallows.

=Gambados=—boot-like leathers, resembling leggings or spatterdashes,
attacht to a saddle, protecting the feet and serving as stirrups.

=Gambeson=—an old-time (’way back) coat of leather or cloth, stuft and
quilted, worn defensivly.

=Gambroon=—a twilled cloth of worsted-and-cotton or linen-and-cotton,
used for summer trousers; also a twilled linen lining material.

=Game bag=—similar to an ammunition b., but with ventilating holes.

=Gams=—slang for legs, and by extension, trousers.

=Gants=—French for gloves.

=Gape=—a yawning or divergence, as of coat tails spreading apart, or of
coat collar standing out and away from the neck.

=Garb=—one’s dress in its entirety; costume; style or peculiarity of
apparel, as clerical g.

=G. A. R. uniform=—a plain blue sack suit, the coat either single or
double-breasted, with brass buttons, and commonly a black slouch hat,
with cord and tassels and gilt badge.

=Garibaldi=—a loose blouse waist resembling those worn by the soldiers
of Garibaldi, the Italian patriot.

=Garmenture=—a generic name for dress.

=Garner’s=—trade diminutiv for the fine shirting percales manufactured
by Garner & Co., Reading, Pa., and Pleasant Valley, N.Y.

=Garnetted=—trade term for fabrics containing garnetted or made over
carded yarns. Garnetted worsteds, for illustration, are not entitled to
the designation “pure worsted”. See Garnetting.

=Garnetting=—the process of separating clippings, waste, etc., into new
spinning fibers, resulting in carded yarns, usually mixt with good
fibers, as garnetted worsted with wool, etc.

=Garrison pocket=—the right hip p.

=Garrison shoes=—(=army=) for enlisted men: of russet calf, Blucher
style.

=Garter ring=—a gold finger r. made in imitation of a strap buckled in a
circle.

=Garter webbing=—a narrow, elastic textil band or ribbon, having strips
of India rubber as part of its warp; elastic w. (qv).

=Garters=—commonly, elastic bands capable of being elongated and
adjusted ad libitum, worn around the lower extremities of one’s
locomotiv members for maintaining the proper position and required
altitude for the habiliments of the tibia.

=Garters=—nautical slang for leg irons.

=Gas iron=—a tailor’s smoothing or pressing i., heated by internal gas
jets.

=Gasoline iron=—a tailor’s i. heated within by means of a gasoline
flame, the fluid being contained in a tank affixt to the outside.

=Gassing=—a finishing process in cotton cloth manufacturing; removing
the fuzz by singeing.

=Gauche=—in ill taste, awkward.

=Gauntlet=—a glove with wide cuffs attacht, usually stiff, covering the
coat sleeves, to protect from dust and wind in driving; originally a
mailed covering for the hand and wrist, often with offensiv armor.

=Gauze=—any light open-woven cotton, silk or wool material.

=Gauze weaving=—a method in which the warp threads are more or less
intertwined among themselves, achieving light, open texturs and many
fanciful or lacy combinations; if plain it is usually called leno.

=Gem=—any precious stone, particularly when cut and set ready for
wearing.

=Gem peg=—a rest for the g. stick (qv) in g. cutting.

=Gem stick=—a rod, on the end of which a g. is cemented whilst being
cut.

=Gem stone=—general term given to minerals suitable for cutting, as a g.

=Gemel ring=—a r. formed of 2 or more rings; a puzzle r.

=Genapping=—a process in woolen manufacture by which the free fuzz or
loose fiber known as “nap” is removed from woolen yarn by singeing to
make it suitable for certain kinds of cloth.

=General’s uniform=—see Full dress, Dress u., White u., Service u. Also
see variants.

=Geneva gown=—a clergyman’s full g. of black silk or wool stuff, made
with an inner cassock-front, meeting in a sort of military collar, with
white banks at the neck, and buttoning all the way down the front.

=Genoese velvet=—a rich patterned silk v., sometimes interwoven with
gold thread.

=Gent=—not a gentleman.

=Gent’s furnisher=—the vulgar general title of a very respectable
business.

=Genteel=—les bourgeois gentilhommes.

=German sock=—a knitted s. of extra heavy wool, with buckled tops or
with canvas legging tops reaching to the knee, for wear with arctics or
heavy shoes.

=Get up=—a scheme of costume; the way you are drest.

=Gew-gaw=—any flashy, useless ornament.

=Ghaba=—a long, loose flowing coatlike garment worn by the merchant
class in Persia; is double-breasted, lapping over and fastening with 2
buttons, while, about the waist, a shawl is wound several times, knotted
and the ends tuckt out of sight.

=Gift-of-gab=—an eccentricity of salesmen.

=Gig=—a machine for raising a nap on cloth by passing it over rotating
cylinders armed with teasels. Compare Slubbing machine.

=Gigging=—giving a nap to woolen cloths, such as broadcloths, beaver,
chinchilla, melton, etc.

=Giller=—a horsehair fishing line.

=Gilling=—a step in the process of combing worsted yarns; bringing the
fibers level and parallel into a uniform strand.

=Gilt button=—brass.

=Gimmal ring=—see Gemel r.

=Gimp buttonhole=—made as described under b. making, but employing very
coarse silk twist, and taking long, regular stitches over a heavy cord.
Contrast Satin b. h.

=Gingerbread=—over-fancy, glaring, loud, fussy, insubstantial.

=Gingham=—a plain-woven reversible cotton fabric, loom-patterned in
simple checks, stripes and plaids.

=Gingham=—vernacular for a large family umbrella.

=Ginning=—a step in the process of preparing cotton for weaving;
separating, mechanically, the seeds from the fiber.

=Girdle=—the circumferential rim of a diamond or other precious stone;
the line of juncture of the upper and lower pyramids. See Brilliant
cutting.

=Glace=—glove trade term, meaning polisht or drest kid (or other)
leather.

=Glad rags=—evening dress clothes; frock coats; new or good clothes,
generally.

=Glasses=—generality for eye g. or spectacles.

=Glaze=—a sizing or high finish applied to certain fabrics, as sleeve
linings, hat trimmings, cheap underwear trimmings, etc. See Glazing,
Sizing and Washable.

=Glazed kid=—trade term for kid leather finisht with a high polish, in
contradistinction to dull k., which has a flat or dull appearance. See
Chrome k.

=Glazing=—a glossing or calendering process effected by steam-heated
steel rollers.

=Glengarry=—a cape overcoat; now known as Inverness (qv).

=Glengarry=—a Scotch cap.

=Glims=—cant for spectacles. (British).

=Gloria=—a twill woven silk and wool fabric, used largely for umbrellas.

=Gloss finish=—see High polish.

=Glove=—a leather or textil covering for the hands, having separate
stalls for each finger. Anciently gloves possest considerable
significance as pledges of troth and confidence, gages of battle,
emblems of office, etc.—which is interesting to the searcher for
curiosa, but too lengthy for this short-order book.

=Glove=—a wooden scraper, fastened to the workman’s hands, used in
felting hats.

=Glove box=—a container for gloves.

=Glove kid=—a term used mostly by shoemakers to designate a fine, soft
leather employed for the tops of fine shoes.

=Glove of mail=—a mailed gauntlet.

=Glove stretcher=—a device for stretching or “easing” gloves.

=Glove tree=—a wooden form in the shape of a hand for keeping gloves in
condition.

=Gloversville=—a town in New York where nearly all the gloves made in
this country are produced.

=Goat=—an omnivorous animal, once characteristic of Harlem and the
Bronx, whose hide furnishes shoe leather and glove skins and whose pelt
is made up into wild animal fur robes, etc.

=Goatee=—a beard or tuft, so trimmed that it falls from the chin like
the beard of a goat; a fashion once very common, but now rare.

=Goater=—a thief’s term for dress.

=Goggle-cap=—a chauffeur’s c. having a front band in which goggles are
affixt.

=Goggles=—a covering for the eyes, or also for part of the face, with
glasses or lenses secured in silk gauze, leather, metal or rubber,
fastened around the head with straps or wire frames and worn to exclude
dust when automobiling, mining, etc.

=Gold=—a precious metal, bowed down to, in the representativ abstract,
by all the tribes of Israel and by the also-ran; in commerce and
industry made into jewelry for one’s wives and near-wives; in medicin as
an alleged constituent of a celebrated cure for good fellows.

=Gold filled=—trade term for a compound plate of 2 sheets of g. having a
sheet of baser metal between them; by extension applied to cheap jewelry
made thereof.

=Gold lace=—l. wrought with g. or gilt thread; an ornamental or
decorativ trimming fabric formed by weaving silken threads wound round
with g. filaments; most used for military, naval and similar uniforms.

=Gold stick=—an official of the royal household of Great Britain, a
colonel of the Life Guards or a captain of the gentlemen-at-arms, who
bears a gilt rod on state occasions; also loosely applied to other state
attendants.

=Goldsmiths’ company=—one of the ancient London guilds, having certain
hereditary privileges, among them that of stamping or certifying all
gold and silver.

=Golf bag=—a long, open-end b. of canvas, leather or plaid, or
combinations thereof, with a sling strap, and usually with an outside
pocket for balls.

=Golf cap=—general name for cloth caps made with a visor or peak, but
without a band.

=Golf cloth=—see Albert c.

=Golf coat=—generally, a single-breasted sack c. or Norfolk jacket with
a plaited fullness under the arms to allow freedom of stroke (whence
name of Stroke c. sometimes given) with a belted back; more loosely, any
old c. one is not afraid of soiling; once upon a recent time a gaudy
thing of green or red, or with green or red trimmings.

=Golf discs=—small rubber knobs affixt to heels and soles of shoes for
surety of footing.

=Golf glove=—a g. of soft leather, usually chamois, commonly made with
open (hole) knuckles and to button on the top or outside of wrist; altho
there are many other models.

=Golf hose=—heavy woolen or worsted stockings, in Scotch patterns, quite
“swell” when they were costly.

=Golf shoes=—s. made for the use of golfers, with protruding nails or
buttons on soles to prevent slipping.

=Golf sleeves=—trade term for neglige shirts with s. made in 2 pieces,
separated and buttoning at about the hight of the elbow, the forepart
being removed for freedom and comfort.

=Golf stocks=—any neck stock.

=Golf studs=—see Boot s. and G. discs.

=Golf waistcoat=—same as Coat sweater.

=Golosh=—an overshoe; formerly of wood; but modernly of rubber.

=Good form=—see Form.

=Good middling=—see Cotton classification.

=Good ordinary=—see Cotton classification.

=Goodwood=—perhaps the most fashionable race-meet in England, vieing
with Ascot, but unlike the latter, being a private park, owned by the
Duke of Richmond.

=Goodyear stitching=—a modern mechanical process of sewing together the
sole and vamp of a shoe, the process commencing and concluding at the
breast or back of heel. See below.

=Goodyear welt=—in shoemaking, meaning that the uppers and soles are
secured by means of a welt sewed on the Goodyear machine, an improvement
on the McKay machine. See above.

=Goose=—a tailor’s heaving smoothing iron, originally the kind heated on
a stove or flame; so called from its handle, which somewhat resembles
the neck of a goose.

=Gore=—a triangular piece of cloth let into a garment to widen it or eke
out narrow goods; a gusset.

=Gore=—see Elastic g.

=Gorge=—that part of a coat or vest encircling the neck; where the
collar, if any, is joined. Compare Opening.

=Gorget=—(1) an ornamental neckband, very full and broad in front, worn
a century or two ago when men knew how to dress; (2) a steel throat
armor.

=Goring=—see Elastic gore.

=Gown=—(1) a sack overcoat; a Chesterfield; a raincoat; (2) a
clergyman’s robe; (3) a bachelor’s, doctor’s or other academic g.; (4) a
night robe; (5) the slip or covering thrown over you whilst in the
barber’s chair.

=Gownsman=—a collegian.

=Grade=—to arrange a scale or system of sizes for manufacturing or for
buying and selling; to classify fibers, qualities, etc.

=Grader=—an assistant to the designer or head cutter in wholesale
manufacturing houses; his duty is to take the first paper patterns
designed for the season and grade them onto heavy paper for the cloth
cutters to work from; these are called “block patterns”.

=Grading=—the making of a set of patterns, in all sizes, for any article
of apparel.

=Graduated tie=—a t. for wear with standing shirt collars, narrowest at
the middle and widening evenly to the ends.

=Graft=—a sticky substance much esteemed by buyers, manufacturers and
politicians.

=Grain leather=—l. made from the hides of neat cattle, split so thin as
to be suitable for same uses as goat, calf, etc., which it is made to
imitate.

=Grand street=—a street in New York famous for its Jewish pushcart
trade; being lined for many blocks with double rows of peripatetic
merchants displaying almost every class of merchandise.

=Grandpa’s hat=—a tall “top h.” of felt or beaver fur or rough silk
plush, bell shaped, reminiscent of the 40’s.

=Granit=—weaving term for small irregular effects produced by yarns of
several colors or by an irregular arrangement of the warp and weft,
comprehending any and all fabrics without specific weave for foundation;
in general, any face finisht fancy weave suiting not made on a twill.
(=Granite.=)

=Grass linen=—coarse, plain woven, unbleacht l., used for summer
clothing.

=Grass suit=—a weedy thing that makes a duck hunter look like a tree to
a fool bird, but like a cannibal to timid humans.

=Gray cloth=—undyed.

=Gray cotton=—unbleacht or undyed.

=Grease paint=—an article of theatrical makeup.

=Grease spot=—the badge of a slob.

=Great-coat=—any heavy overcoat; particularly a coachman’s skirted
overcoat.

=Great Scott!=—an aptly named depilatory (a proprietary article) said to
be composed of tallow and pitch, which, on removal, causes the
beauty-seeker to say Great Scott—and then some.

=Greaves=—leg armor.

=Grecian sack=—a loose, baggy box overcoat worn about 1850–60, usually
with velvet collar and cuffs and quilted satin lining.

=Greeley hat=—see Horace Greeley h.

=Green cap=—a color (of c.) that undergraduates in some of our colleges
are chivalrously endeavoring to force freshmen to wear.

=Green gold=—g. alloyed with silver. Compare red g. and white g.

=Greenback=—vernacular for paper money.

=Grege=—raw silk as wound off the cocoons.

=Gregorian=—see Wig.

=Gremial veil=—an embroidered cloth spread over the knees of a bishop
when sitting during high mass.

=Grenadier cap=—a tall pointed c. or head covering, properly of
bearskin, worn in certain European military corps.

=Grenadine=—a gauzy or net-like silk fabric used for men’s neckwear and
women’s dresses.

=Grenadine=—a species of thrown silk. See Throwing.

=Grenoble=—(1) a town in France famous for its many glove factories and
the fine quality of kid skins raised in the surrounding neighborhood;
(2) a trade diminutiv implying excellence.

=Grey Breeks=—the popular name for Lord Lynedoch’s 90th Regiment of Foot
(1794).

=Grip=—a suit case; a large traveling bag.

=Gripper=—see Wiper.

=Grogram=—a stiff fabric of silk and wool or all-wool, of diagonal
weave; a coarse stuff of which boat cloaks, heavy coats, etc., were once
made.

=Groom’s box overcoat=—see Coachman’s b. o.

=Groom’s frock coat=—same as Coachman’s f. c., but about one inch
shorter, and worn with a leather belt.

=Groom’s livery=—like coachman’s l. with slight modifications of detail.

=Groom’s vest=—a waistcoat of whipcord or corduroy with knitted or
flannel sleeves attacht.

=Gros de Londres=—a fine weave of gros-grain silk (qv).

=Grosgrain=—a stout, close-woven, fine corded silk fabric, dyed in plain
colors and having but little luster.

=Guanaco=—a South American animal of the camel family yielding a coarse,
inferior hair of but little use.

=Guard’s coat=—a long, loose traveling overcoat of tweed or homespun,
made with a whole back, held together in gathers by a cloth strap.
(1907)

=Guernsey=—a close-fitting, knitted woolen shirt worn by sailors.

=Guessfit=—term coined by the compiler of this dictionary for use by
tailors in derision of readymade—and now used by cheap tailors
everywhere who live in glass houses themselves.

=Guinea cloth=—see Outing c.

=Gum bucket=—nautical slang for tobacco pipe.

=Gum shoe=—a rubber overshoe.

=Gum shoe=—a term for underhand transactions.

=Gum stocking=—see Elastic s.

=Gum tissue=—see Rubber t. and Buckskin.

=Gums=—rubber overshoes.

=Gun-mouthed trousers=—see Sailor’s t.

=Gun-pocket=—place for the arsenal.

=Gunner’s uniform=—(=navy=) see Special full dress, full d., dress,
undress; (=army=) Full dress, Dress u., Service u., Fatigue u.;
(=revenue cutter service=) Full dress, Service dress. See also
Variations.

=Gunny=—see Gunnysacking.

=Gunnysacking=—coarse spun canvas or burlap of loose material, such as
jute, used here for baling—but they use it in India for clothing among
the poorer classes.

=Gusset=—a triangular piece of cloth, usually small, inserted into a
garment to give added strength or more room; a gore.

=Gutter seam=—term used by collar and cuff manufacturers descriptiv of
an edge s. made by folding the inner and outer plies, previously stitcht
together inside out, in over the interlining, and then stitcht thru,
finally, from the outside, the inner edges of the fold being generally
overcast in advance of the first stitching. This s. is supposed to wear
extra well, with little or no (?) liability to turn into “saw edges”.

=Guy=—anyone who makes a show of himself in his clothes.

=Gymnasium shoe=—a laced soft s. of kid or canvas, with a light elk or
buff turn sole, having but little sock lining and no counter or box toe.

=Gymkhana costume=—anything absurd, in keeping with the farcical
character of this ridiculous race or sport.

=Gyves=—fetters; the old word for handcuffs.


                                   H

=Haberdasher=—a dealer in “men’s furnishings”.

=Habit=—the double-breasted dress coat of 1840–50 with very high collar.

=Hackle=—see Hatchel.

=Hackling=—a process of preparing flax fibers for spinning, arranging
them smoothly and parallel.

=Haik=—a white drapery drawn low on the forehead and falling
curtain-like about the face; it conceals the cachi (qv) and is held in
place by one or more tightly fitting rings of camel’s or goat’s hair,
prest down tightly on the head, and is of such dimensions as to conceal
the entire figure. (Arabia.)

=Hair clipper=—a small hand-mowing machine for making “shavy-headed
monkeys”.

=Hair cutter=—a patronizing sort of barber.

=Hair dresser=—just barber.

=Hair dye=—essence of vanity used to make gay bloods of old bucks.

=Hair oil=—maybe medicinal, but once worn to plaster down one’s hair
when such was considered “the thing”; now a mark of the near-gent.

=Hair seal=—unpluckt s.

=Haircloth=—an elastic, resilient material woven of cotton or linen warp
with a weft or filling of hair from the manes and tails of horses;
employed as a stiffening interlining in coats, etc.

=Hairline=—in weaving, a narrow striped color effect on clothes of any
description.

=Half a warp=—see Warp.

=Half-and-half-bound=—in tailoring, an edge finish where the braid is
applied evenly, back and front covering the edge, and stitcht only along
the outer edges of the braid.

=Half-and-half braid=—see Silk b.

=Half-and-half sleeve=—a coat s. of which the two parts are of nearly
equal width; an old style of s. with a seam showing in front, and is
seldom now used.

=Half back=—trade term for a class of woolens combining some of the
characteristics of both thru-and-thru and backt goods.

=Half blood=—wool classification term. See Wool.

=Half-boot=—an ankle boot.

=Half hose=—men’s stockings; socks.

=Half lined=—tailoring term applied to garments that are partially lined
or partially “skeleton”.

=Half mitts=—gloves with half length fingers and thumbs.

=Half mourning=—black mitigated by lavender, gray or other subdued
colors or white.

=Half-peg=—trade term for trousers on the peg-top order, but not cut
quite so full. See P. top. and Full p.

=Half round=—trade term for buttons shaped like a half sphere.

=Half Scotch=—see Scotch edge.

=Half skeleton=—tailoring term for coats with unlined back, the
side-bodies being lined.

=Half sole=—repairing term for worn shoes, boots, etc.—a new s. applied
to the tread or forepart of the s.

=Half top pocket=—set at a shorter angle from the vertical than the top
p.; almost a side p.

=Haling hands=—heavy gloves or mittens of colonial days worn by sailors
and workmen (hauling—h?).

=Hall-boy’s suit=—plain cloth, single- or double-breasted blouse or sack
coat, with regular lapel collar (or with standing military collar if
single-breasted, ornamented, if at all, on cuffs or shoulders or both;
side seams of trousers trimmed to match. For clubs or hotels the jacket
or blouse may have two or three diverging rows of buttons, but is closed
with hooks and eyes, the collar and cuffs sometimes being of contrasting
color of cloth, in which case the trousers have a narrow piping of same
in the side seams. No waistcoat.

=Hall mark=—(British) the mark placed upon gold and silver by the
Goldsmiths’ Company certifying to fineness. A slight variation each year
establishes the date of production.

=Halo=—an aurea worn by the head of the house, clearly perceptible to
himself and a few satellites, but absolutely undiscernible by anyone
else of normal faculties.

=Halstead street=—a street in Chicago having a great number of small and
cheap clothing shops (compare South s. and Baxter s.); a local synonym
for cheap clothing.

=Hand-fitted=—tailoring term for the linings fitted into a coat one
piece at a time, all the sewing being done by hand. Compare Bagged.

=Hand-glasses=—eye-glasses and spectacles were once so called in New
York.

=Hand loom=—(1) a more or less primitiv or improved l. operated entirely
by h. and foot, as opposed to power l.; usually found in cottages; (2)
trade term for goods woven on h. looms; nearly synonymous with homespun.

=Hand made=—made by h. workers: distinguisht from machine made.

=Hand made buttonhole=—not machine made.

=Hand-me-down=—(1) readymade clothes; (2) second-h. clothes; from being
handed down from one person to another.

=Hand padded=—tailoring term applied (1) to collars, lapels and coat
fronts, meaning that same was made by h. instead of machine; (2) the
result of making such parts by h., taking close, even, tight stitches.
See next.

=Hand padding=—cloth, canvas, shoddy, etc., sewed together in position
and ironed into shape entirely by h. for fashion’s sake or to improve
fit.

=Hand shaping=—term generally applied to shoulders and coat fronts,
indicating that the interlinings were cut and sewed together by h.,
being workt into shape during the latter operation, in contradistinction
to such work made wholly or in part by machine (vs).

=Hand-to-handmade=—tailoring term meaning made entirely by operators,
passing, stage by stage, from one h. to another. See Section work.

=Hand-woven=—(1) made on h. looms; (2) not made in a mill.

=Handball gloves=—g. made of padded leather, with full or cut-off
fingers.

=Handcuffs=—steel wristlets of temporary wear occasionally seen in the
lower walks of life.

=Handjar=—an oriental dagger or short broadsword.

=Handkerchief=—a square of linen, silk or cotton, with hem or selvage;
plain, printed, embroidered or otherwise fancified, used for wiping the
face or nose, and by country swains to waft a bye-bye to the old folks
and one other as the train pulls out.

=Handkerchief bosom=—in shirt making a neglige shirt with a b. made of a
fancy handkerchief.

=Handkerchief box=—a receptacle for handkerchiefs.

=Handle=—trade term for the “feel” of textil fabrics as indicativ of
working and wearing qualities.

=Handsel=—(1) a gift or token of good will; a votiv offering to Luck;
the first sales or earnings, bestowed upon some one; (2) earnest money
on a contract.

=Hanger=—(1) a loop sewed into the neck of a coat-lining or waist lining
of trousers for the purpose of hanging them up in a way to become
shapeless; (2) a chain for the same purpose sometimes used on heavy
overcoats; (3) a wooden or metal device over which coats and vests may
be hung in a shape-retaining manner or trousers suspended to retain
their creases.

=Hanger=—a short cut-and-thrust sword, curved near the point; a sort of
cutlass. (17th and 18th centuries).

=Hangnail=—skin partially torn from its attachment near the root of a
finger nail.

=Hank=—a bundle of two or more skeins of yarn tied together; also a
single skein (qv).

=Hankie=—colloquial for handkerchief.

=Hanselines=—a kind of breeches. (Obsolete.)

=Hard finisht=—same as Clear f.

=Hard press=—same as following.

=Hard prest=—tailor’s term for flat p. lapels, seams, etc. Compare Soft
p.

=Hard rim button=—a b. made over a mold, usually covered with cloth
matching the garment, but protected by a rim and back of hard rubber,
naturally the most durable of covered buttons.

=Hare=—a short-tailed, long-eared rodent of the genus Lepus, the pelt of
which is an important staple of hat manufacture and is also largely used
in cheap fur garments.

=Hare’s combings=—loose or dead hair removed in cleaning skins, and used
as an adulterant in the manufacture of cheap hats.

=Hare’s foot=—see Rabbit f.

=Harlequin check=—a check pattern of three or more different colors.

=Harness belt=—a leather b. of horsey appearance.

=Harris tweed=—a men’s wear fabric made on the island of Harris, one of
the smaller British isles; originally woven by very poor people on hand
looms, and dyed with natural products. A number of people took an
interest in the work, notably the Duchess of Sutherland, and now a
considerable trade is done in the cloth, which on account of its
excellent qualities and high price, is now widely imitated, the
imitations being known by the same name; the genuine is easily
identified by its peculiar peaty odor.

=Haslock=—the throat-wool of a sheep; the finest grade.

=Hat=—a formal covering for the head; of various models and worn at
various angles of inclination; a frequently remarked characteristic is,
that, altho a h. may be satisfactory any day and night, it may not be
the next morning.

=Hat band=—a ribbon surrounding the crown.

=Hat block=—a mold on which hats are formed.

=Hat body=—an unfinished h. in any stage of its progress from the
forming machine to the stiffening or napping apparatus.

=Hat box=—(1) a round or square carrying case for hats (one or more),
usually of sole leather with fancy silk linings, etc.; (2) the same, of
paper board.

=Hat brush=—a b. of soft bristles for cleansing and smoothing hats.

=Hat case=—a h. box.

=Hat conformateur=—see Conformateur.

=Hat cover=—a mackintosh or rubber covering for coachmen’s or groom’s h.

=Hat furs=—the principal furs used in the manufacture of hats are hare,
rabbit, coney, nutria, beaver, muskrat, seal, mink, etc.

=Hat honor=—doffing the h.; a salute.

=Hat lining=—until the last 10 or 15 years nearly all men’s hats were
lined, usually with satin in one or many colors, and often with white
satin bearing pictures of sporting scenes, landscapes, etc., and
especially portraits of ballet girls, and reproductions of paintings
from life.

=Hat manufacturing=—see Carroting, Devil, Forming, Sizing, Stiffening,
Stretching, Blocking, Finishing, Soft finishing, Curling, Flanging, etc.

=Hat pad=—a strip of felt slipt inside the sweatband to make a large h.
fit a smaller head—and frequently removed the morning after.

=Hat rack=—a row of hooks to hang hats on for some other fellow to
choose from.

=Hat tip=—the gaudy gold label pasted in the crown of a h. by
manufacturers.

=Hatchel=—an implement for cleaning flax or hemp, usually consisting of
a set of iron teeth fastened to a board, thru which the flax is drawn
and broken, removing the woody fiber; a hackel.

=Hatter=—a seller of hats; a friend of Alice in Wonderland, but not,
despite the popular impression, always mad in March.

=Hauberk=—a sort of coat of mail, either chain or plate, worn by the
doughty warriors of the moldly past.

=Haute nouveaute=—high novelty.

=Havelock=—the light cotton cape or neck covering worn by soldiers and
travelers in hot countries, hanging from a cap, behind the neck.

=Haverly hat=—a name given to hats (any style) for a short time during
the latter half of the last century because such hats had tickets, good
at any and all of Haverly’s theaters or traveling shows, entitling the
owner of the h. to admission. (From J. H. Haverly, a popular minstrel
“magnate”).

=Haversack=—(1) a soldier’s ration bag, hung from the shoulder; (2) a
hunter’s leather ammunition case.

=Hawick=—a town in Scotland famous for tweeds.

=Head=—see Wool.

=Head=—the face or small top part of a collar button.

=Head-and-face-protector=—a sort of leather armor for boxers afraid to
take punishment.

=Head carrier=—see Tump line.

=Head harness=—general term for helmets, leather caps, ear guards, etc.,
worn by slugball players.

=Head net=—a contrivance for warding off insects.

=Headlight=—diamond.

=Headstone=—a memorial tablet at the head of a grave, often highly
decorativ (or supposedly so), and emblazoned with a choice compilation
of eulogistic lies.

=Health band=—same as Abdominal b.

=Heather=—a flower found in the meadows of the British kingdom; basis of
the yellow dye used in coloring Harris tweeds.

=Heather mixtures=—trade name for fabrics of no special pattern but
showing a color scheme resembling, tho faintly, a heather meadow.

=Heel=—the pieces of leather put together and placed on the outside of
the shoe immediately under the h. of the foot.

=Heel breast=—(shoemaking) the back of the h.

=Heel lift=—(1) an elastic device of rubber, cork and felt to wear
within shoes for the purpose of relieving the jar of walking, also to
throw up the instep; (2) one of the layers of leather used in forming
the h. of a shoe.

=Heel plate=—(1) a metal plate affixt to heels to prevent the leather
from undue wear or damage; (2) a metal attachment fastened to the h. of
a shoe for securing certain styles of ice skates securely thereto. See
Shoe p.

=Heel rand=—see Rand.

=Heel seat wheeling=—a little line of indentations made in the leather
around the h. (of a shoe) by a wheel, as one of the finishing
operations.

=Heel shaping=—a mechanical process, of course.

=Heel stay=—see H. strip.

=Heel strap=—sometimes called back s. A loop either of leather or woven
tape inserted in the top at the back of the shoe and used to draw the
shoe on the foot by inserting the finger thru the loop.

=Heel-strip=—a narrow band of leather or cloth sewn inside hems of
trousers where they rub on the heel.

=Heeling=—in modern shoemaking an entirely mechanical process, save for
laying the leather together and filling with nails the holes in a
nailing machine.

=Held-blistered edge=—drawn too tightly with the stay tape. (Tailoring
term.)

=Heliotrope=—a “heavy” perfume distilled from or in imitation of the
flower of the same name.

=Hemp=—see Kemp.

=Hemstitch=—an ornamental finish for hems, as in handkerchiefs, effected
by drawing a few threads parallel to the hem and connecting in groups by
stitching, the exposed threads running oppositly.

=Henrietta=—a sort of fine cashmere, usually with a silk warp.

=Hercules braid=—a flat, coarse ribbed worsted braid, of various widths,
used for ornament or decoration, largely for uniforms, and often called
military braid.

=Hermsdorff=—trade diminutiv for fast-black hosiery, etc., dyed by Louis
Hermsdorff, Chemnitz, and used in the sense of being a standard of
quality.

=Herringbone=—general term for patterns, produced in weaving, consisting
of short diagonal lines running warpwise, meeting and contrasting with
another series turned oppositly, with zigzag repetition; a fishbone
pattern.

=Herringbone stitch=—see Padding s.

=Hessians=—high boots, tassled in front, worn early in 19th century.

=Hickory shirting=—(1) a heavy, stout, plain-woven cotton material,
resembling gingham, heavily starcht and calendered, used for working
shirts. See Osnaburg. (2) Name also applied to a coarse twilled cotton
fabric, striped or checkt, also used for working shirts.

=Hides=—trade term for the skins of large animals, as horse, cow, ox,
etc. Compare Skins.

=Higgin=—the old-fashioned shoemaker’s pot of water for wetting soles.

=High-band=—trade term for high, turndown or folded shirt collars; also
called high-bander. See Meeting folder, Lock front, Fold collar, etc.

=High dutchers=—skates, the blades of which are ornamentally curled in
front; those without this ornamentation are called dumps.

=High heels=—a godsend for runts—and surgeons.

=High-pickt=—textil trade term for many threads to the inch.

=High polish=—laundry term for perverted elegance applied to one’s
linen.

=High-rise=—term applied to trousers cut high in the waist. See Rise.

=High-shouldered=—having pronounced shoulders of more than normal hight.

=Highwater=—derisiv term for trousers too short for the wearer.

=Highland gaiters=—overgaiters or spats.

=Hilt=—the handle and guard of a sword.

=Himation=—a square or oblong piece of cloth, more or less decorated,
worn by the early Greeks draped about the left shoulder and covering the
body (more or less) according to its adjustment.

=Hip=—that part of the body between the brim of the pelvis and the free
part of the thigh.

=Hip boots=—b. reaching to the hips.

=Hip pants=—see H. trousers.

=Hip pocket=—a p. placed horizontally in the rear portion of trousers,
between the waistband and seat; a breeding place of sudden death if
fortified.

=Hip-spring=—tailoring term indicating an allowance made for the
fullness of the hips in cutting a garment, as a waistcoat.

=Hip trousers=—t. intended to be worn without suspenders, and to be
sustained by the hips with or without the aid of a belt; usually cut
lower in the waist, and closer fitting there, than when suspenders are
to be worn.

=Hirsute appendage=—whiskers.

=Hob nails=—short n. with very broad, heavy heads, used for sporting
shoes, working brogans, etc., as a protection to the soles and for
surety of footing.

=Hockey glove=—a stout padded leather g. for protecting fingers, joints,
etc.

=Hockey leg guards=—see Shin g.

=Hockey shoe=—a laced s. with a strap across instep from side to side of
heel.

=Hog=—pigskin.

=Hog wool=—term given, in England, to w. clipt from lambs.

=Hoi polloi=—“gents” who wear “pants” and ready-tied neckwear.

=Hold-all=—a leather or canvas shawl roll or carrier. See Carry-all and
Wrap.

=Hold in=—tailoring term signifying, in the making of a garment, the
feat of getting a larger part neatly into a smaller opening, or seaming
a larger to a smaller part, or to work in an edge to less than its cut
dimension, for purposes of shapeliness, style, etc. Compare Stretch.

=Holland=—a fine, stout, compact, plain woven linen cloth, usually
unbleacht, sometimes slightly glazed, used as shirtings, suitings,
interlinings, etc.; originally made in Holland, whence name.

=Holster=—a carrier for the personal arsenal.

=Hollow ground=—cutler’s term indicating that a blade, as of a razor, is
ground concave instead of flat.

=Hombourg hat=—about same as Alpine or Fedora. See Tyrolean h.

=Homespun=—general name for the plain woven woolen suitings made by the
peasantry of the British isles, properly from undyed natural colored
homespun yarns, with or without an admixture of home dyed yarns, woven
on crude hand looms, and of rather loose, tho stout, texture and of
enormous durability. Modernly imitated on power looms.

=Honeycomb=—(1) an ornamental pattern, effected in the loom, applied
mostly to towelings, giving a resemblance to honeycomb cells; (2) a
raised effect in weaving, sometimes employed in worsted suitings.

=Hood=—a cloth covering for the head; sometimes attacht to overcoats and
capes, also to academic gowns, ornamentally so in this latter case.

=Hood overcoat=—any o. with an attacht or detachable hood; a military o.

=Hoods=—scholastic h. are made of the same material as the gowns; lined
with the official colors of the college or university conferring the
degree, or with which the recipients of academic honors from other
institutions may be connected, and are trimmed with velvet, the color
being distinctiv of the faculty to which the degree pertains. Thus: Arts
and Letters, white; Theology, scarlet; Law, purple; Medicin, green;
Philosophy, dark blue; Science, gold yellow; Fine arts, brown; Music,
pink; Pharmacy, olive; Dentistry, lilac; Veterinary, gray; Forestry,
russet; Library science, lemon.

=Hook-and-eye=—a small h. of double wire and an appropriate e. to engage
it; a garment fastening device.

=Hook-in=—to shorten, as of the gorge of a collar.

=Hop gloves=—white lisle g. in contradistinction to white cotton or
Berlin g. (West Point colloquialism.)

=Hop stick=—a crutch.

=Hopsacking=—a coarse, open-wove, woolen fabric, with a square or
checkered mesh in imitation of bagging, made in suiting and overcoating
weights.

=Horace Greeley hat=—a tall, felt “plug” h., later known as the (Grover)
Cleveland h.

=Horned alligator=—a leather characterized by its peculiar sharp ridges
or protuberances (the spinal ridge of the critter?).

=Hornoid=—trade name for a composition used for buttons in imitation of
real horn.

=Horns=—unseen articles of decoration sometimes worn by married men.

=Horse-shoe collar=—trade term for coat collars not made on a straight
line, but curved and twisted to fit corresponding hollows carved into
the neck of the coat. This is a c. that is easily made by machinery and
is a characteristic of most readymade clothing and cheap tailoring.
Compare Straight c.

=Horse show=—once a parade-show of horse-flesh and accomplishments;
nowadays a raree show of the frills and fripperies of human “fashion”
and vanity.

=Horsey=—applied to a straining after coaching or stable effects in
attire by those who think it smart.

=Hose=—general term for stockings, long, short and otherwise; anciently,
a sort of tights.

=Hosen=—obsolete plural of hose.

=Hosier=—British for “gent’s furnisher”.

=Hosier=—one who deals in hosiery and other knit goods. (Mostly of
British use.)

=Hosiery=—broadly comprehending stockings, tights and all branches of
the hosier’s business.

=Hot-water bag=—an article of temporary wear in illness.

=Houppelande=—(1) a kind of cloak or overgarment worn alike by men and
women in France in the 15th century, resembling somewhat a modern
dressing gown or kimona; (2) a name given in France, in the early part
of the last century, to a single-caped frock coat, sometimes called a
crispin cloak (qv).

=House coat=—a fancy lounging c. or jacket.

=House slippers=—homely solid comfort.

=Housemaid’s collar=—“British” for the highband folded or double shirt
c. (men’s—not women’s, mind you!).

=Hovie=—a mantle of state, worn about the time of the crusades, quite a
gorgeous affair and often hung with silver bells.

=Huckaback=—a heavy, coarse, rough linen or cotton toweling of a
birdseye, honeycomb or armure weave; commonly shortened to huck.

=Huddersfield=—a manufacturing town in Yorkshire and the chief seat of
the English cloth and woolen manufactures; a name commonly given in this
country to clay worsteds from the best coming from that town from the
mills of J. & B. Clay.

=Humeral veil=—an oblong scarf of the same material as the chasuble,
worn over the shoulders by sub-deacons at high mass and by priests when
giving the benediction or carrying the sacrament in procession.

=Humidor=—a casket designed to maintain a certain degree of moisture or
humidity in cigars kept therein.

=Hunting boot=—an extra heavy and high shoe of stout, waterproof
leather, foxt and double soled, with hobnails in sole and heel.

=Hunting cap=—a close-fitting, velvet c., with short visor.

=Hunting-case=—a watch-c. having the dial side as well as the back
protected by a cover or lid.

=Hunting coat=—a short, red cutaway—English, you know.

=Hunting costume=—those who ape British modes will please wear a “pink”
(i.e. vivid scarlet) frock coat with round-cornered bell skirt (or
“pink” morning coat), white corduroy or leather breeches, fancy
waistcoat, neck stock, top boots, and tall silk hat; appareled thus you
are fit to join William Waldorf Astor and other near-Britons.

=Hunting cuffs=—a finish on coat sleeves consisting of buttoned open
vents with, usually, a row or two of stitching in simulation of cuffs.

=Hunting frock=—a single-breasted f. coat with short full skirts.

=Hunting hat=—a silk h. with cord or guard to prevent loss.

=Hunting hood=—a knitted wool h. covering entire head (except face),
neck and upper shoulders, worn in cold countries by hardy hunters,
explorers, etc.

=Hunting sack=—a name given to single-breasted s. coats designed for
shooting purposes; usually with a turned down collar closing at the
throat and capacious patch pockets.

=Hunting shirt=—(1) a deerskin, blouse-like garment, in use amongst
trappers and frontiersmen; sometimes very ornamental; (2) any stout
woolen, cotton or linen s. of inconspicuous color.

=Husking cloth=—a heavy cotton ticking used for farmers’ gloves and
mittens.

=Husking glove=—a g. used by harvest hands for husking, etc.

=Hustling suit=—see Jepson.

=Hymeneal knot=—a style of k. that, with a little practise, is one of
the easiest tied and untied.

=Hyperion curls=—found in novels and in portraits of Roscoe Conkling.


                                   I

=Ice-cream hat=—a light-colored, soft felt h. on the telescope order,
extreme in some detail of color, shape or trimming, affected usually by
college boys and other irresponsibles.

=Idiot fringe=—football hair; bangs.

=Imitation=—not genuin; deceptiv; fraudulent.

=Imitation fur=—textil achievements, usually on a stockinet body, often
quite deceptiv; near-fur.

=Imitation haircloth=—a stiffening interlining fabric not made with
horse hair, but entirely or nearly so of heavily sized vegetable fibers,
tho some of the “better” grades have variously alternated real horse
hairs inserted. For tailoring purposes these poorer grades are
practically worthless. See Istle.

=Immaculate=—spotless.

=Imp=—one length of twisted hair in a fishing line.

=Imperial=—a cravat tied in a small, close knot and with long, wide,
flowing ends or apron.

=Imperial=—a pointed tuft of hair on the chin just under the lower lip;
so called because worn by Napoleon III.

=Imported=—“from the old world”, or elsewhere.

=Imprime=—French for printed; generally used in speaking of warp-printed
silks.

=In-and-out flap=—in tailoring a f. made the same size as the pocket so
it can be turned into same; the opposit of laid-on f., which may be
larger than the width of the pocket opening; the former the distinctiv
pocket f. of sack coats, the latter more often seen on frock coats.

=In-the-drag=—tailors’ term indicating that one is behind in his work
and has to “pull out”.

=In the flannel=—see Flannel.

=In the grease=—term for fleece marketed as clipt from the sheep;
unwasht.

=In the gum=—silk that has not been “boiled off”.

=Inauguration cloth=—a variant of coronation c., used in this country
during the vogue of the former and about the time of a presidential
inauguration.

=Inch tape=—a t. measure.

=Incline measures=—m. taken by tailors to ascertain if a customer is
erect or stooping, carries his head forward or backward, has large or
flat blades, etc., and how much.

=Incroyable=—a name given to politicians and dandies (imagine,
politicians!) of the time of the (French) Directorate (1795–99), who
made extremity in dress a cult—they wore the highest collars, the
chokingest cravats, the most pretentious canes and were otherwise much
like the precieuses ridicules of Moliere’s time.

=India silk=—a soft, thin, untwilled s. fabric, woven like fine muslin.

=Indian gown=—see Banyan.

=Indian tanned=—name given to a slow process of preparing leather for
the market, by curing the raw hides with salt and repeated immersions in
bark solutions, usually requiring as many weeks to complete as acid
tanning (qv) does days, but resulting in a softer, more pliable and more
durable leather.

=Indigo=—a deep blue dye obtained from several plants of the genus
Indigofera, native of India and Asia and also found in Africa and South
America; known from the most remote times; a permanent color.

=Indigo test=—the common t. for i.-blue on wool is to drop a small
quantity of nitric acid on the goods and leave it to dry out, when, if
the goods are pure i., the center of the spot will be a bright yellow
with a border of green. For testing on cotton the simplest and safest
way is to burn a piece of the goods on a porcelain plate; if the color
is i., that part of the plate where the i. burns will be covered with a
blue film; no other coloring matter will show a similar reaction.

=Inexpressibles=—prudery for trousers, outer as well as under.

=Infantry uniform=—see Full dress, Dress u., White u., Service u.,
Fatigue u., et var.

=Infielder’s glove=—a padded g. of buckskin or other stout leather for
baseball players.

=Informal dress=—see Day d.

=Ingrain=—dyed in the yarn or in a raw state.

=Inlaid collar=—in tailoring, a c. partly of the material of the garment
and partly of velvet, the latter laid under the cloth and forming a sort
of border or frame around it. Compare Laid-on c.

=Inner leaf=—see Leaf.

=Inseam=—in tailoring, the inner seam of the leg of a pair of trousers;
sometimes also called the crotch seam; also the forearm seam of a
sleeve.

=Inseam=—(glove term) a plain turned-in seam, used only with the heavier
leathers.

=Inside back=—the inner lining of a vest, particularly the back part
thereof.

=Inside breast pocket=—a p. made within the lining of a coat, ordinarily
on the right side only, should there be an outside b. p., but if none,
then on both sides.

=Inside pocket=—any p. made on the i. of a garment, usually within the
lining, as in coats and waistcoats.

=Inside shop=—in the clothing business, any s. (usually on the
manufacturer’s premises) where the manufacturer hires the workmen thru a
foreman. See Outside s.

=Inside ticket pocket=—a small p. within the right-hand p. of a coat.

=Insignia=—any device or decoration used by orders, societies or
governments as signs or marks of office or distinction.

=Insignia of rank=—(=army=) devices worn on the collar of the uniform,
as follows: general and lieutenant general, such as they may prescribe;
major general, two silver stars; brigadier general, 1 silver star;
colonel, 1 silver spread eagle; lieutenant colonel, 1 silver leaf;
major, 1 gold leaf; captain, 2 silver bars; first lieutenant, 1 silver
bar. Also shoulder straps, similarly markt, as well as other regulation
distinguishments—better read the department rules and regulations.

=Insole=—any inner lining or sole of a shoe, whether a fixt part thereof
or removable.

=Instructor’s glove=—a boxing g. for teachers of the manly art, so
constructed as to do no hurt.

=Insurance=—getting some rich corporation to pay you for burning up.

=Interlining=—any textil or other material placed between the cloth and
the lining proper of a garment for purposes of shape, strength,
stiffening, etc.

=Intimate=—cant term for shirt.

=Inventory=—a detailed account of merchandise, accounts and business
transacted; that on which hopes of advanced salaries rise or fall.

=Inverness=—a long, loose overcoat with cape, but without sleeves, for
evening dress wear.

=Inverted seam=—sewn inside out.

=Invisible patch=—cobbler’s term for a patch applied by cement to a worn
or damaged spot, the edges of the p. having first been shaved thin to
leave little or no ridge or seam.

=Invisible stitch=—in tailoring, any s. not permitted to come to the
surface, as a felling s., pricking s., etc.

=Invisible suspenders=—s. worn underneath the shirt or shirtwaist and
attaching to the trousers buttons, usually by means of loop hooks,
commonly worn with summer attire when it is desired to appear without a
vest or coat or both.

=I. O. O. F. coat=—same as Masonic Sir Knight’s c., but with 9 buttons
instead of 11.

=I. O. U.=—familiar term for chirographical curiosities collected,
largely as a fad, perhaps, by tailors.

=Iridescent=—color-glitter; an effect of weaving.

=Irish linen=—general term for fine, plain-woven full bleacht linen
cloth for shirt bosoms, collars and cuffs, handkerchiefs, etc.; usually
36 inches wide.

=Iron=—lots of it used to weight cheap silks.

=Iron cloth=—a fabric manufactured from steel wool, having the
appearance of having been woven from horsehair and used for stiffening
certain kinds of coat collars, such as standing collars on uniforms,
etc.

=Iron garters=—cant for leg irons.

=Iron-yarn=—lustrene (qv).

=Ironing=—a finishing process in felt hat manufacturing.

=Ironing=—a finishing process used on the uppers of some kinds of shoes,
a peculiarly shaped iron being used, in modern practise heated by
electricity, sometimes by a lamp or flame. The process is used to smooth
out the wrinkles and creases formed in the leather by handling the shoes
thru the factory in the earlier manufacturing stages, the shoe being
placed on a form during the operation.

=Irons=—see Cokers.

=Istle=—the fiber of a Mexican plant used for cheap brushes, imitation
haircloth, etc. Also called Tampico, Mexican fiber, etc.

=Italian cloth=—a plain colored, twill woven fabric, resembling heavy
satine or jeans, composed of cotton warp with worsted or mohair filling;
also of both cotton warp and weft.

=Ivory=—tusks of the elephant, hippopotamus, narwhal, walrus, etc. See
also I. nut and Vegetable i.

=Ivory nut=—the seed of a Venezuela palm (phytelephas macrocarpa); when
dry is very hard and resembles natural ivory in textur and color; made
into buttons, etc. See Vegetable i.


                                   J

=Jabot=—the shirt-frill or ruffle we wore in the 18th century; a fancy
falling band.

=Jacerma=—a sort of short doublet, part of the national costume of
Hungary.

=Jack-a-dandy=—some sort of a fop.

=Jack boots=—(1) originally, large top b., reaching above the knees and
worn defensivly; (2) riding b. with a large frontpiece at the knees; (3)
heavy top b. reaching above the knees, worn by fishermen and others.

=Jack-knife=—a large, strong clasp k. for the pocket; in the navy worn
with a lanyard.

=Jack-towel=—a roller t.

=Jackanapes=—another sort of a fop.

=Jacket=—(1) a short coat, usually not extending to the knees; a sack
coat; (2) the sack coat worn by servants.

=Jacket suit=—same as sack s. and lounge s. (qv).

=Jacobite=—a shirt collar.

=Jaconet=—a light, soft white cotton cloth, similar to cambric, but
heavier, used for undergarments, night shirts, etc.

=Jacquard loom=—a l. for weaving fancy figured goods as damasks, etc.

=Jaeger=—trade diminutiv for the sanitary natural wool underwear, etc.,
introduced by Dr. S. Jaeger, a German scientist who advocates the
wearing of nothing but natural wool garments inside and out, as well as
for sleeping, house furnishings, etc., and by extension applied to other
makes of natural wool underwear.

=Jag=—in New England, a parcel, bundle, or load; an old English
provincialism which has held its ground colloquially on this side of the
Atlantic. Jag is also a slang term for an umbrella, possibly from that
article being so constantly carried. Also descriptiv of being so happy
with foolish froth that one can’t stand steadily.

=Jail clothes=—see Prison uniform.

=Jam=—cant for gold ring.

=Jansenist=—see Wig.

=Jant=—jaunty or stylish (?) (1816).

=Janus cloth=—a two-faced (sic) plain-woven worsted c.

=Japan=—a sort of varnish for metallic things.

=Japanned leather=—term for varnisht leathers, of which patent l. and
enamel l. are varieties.

=Jardiniere=—weaving term for flowery effects; many-colored.

=Jasper=—in weaving, a seeded or pepper-and-salt effect, rather more
distinctiv than Oxford (qv).

=Java=—a straw hat braid.

=Jean=—a stout, round twilled cloth, either all-cotton or cotton warp
with wool filling; of various grades and finishes; used principally for
working trousers.

=Jean de Bry=—a long skirted coat of about 1810, the tails of which were
twice the length of the body part.

=Jeannet=—a coarse variety of jean (qv) differing structurally in that
the warp instead of the weft threads form the twill. (=Jeannette.=)

=Jellab=—a hooded woolen garment, somewhat like a blouse, worn by Moors
and Arabs. Corruption of Jellabia.

=Jemmy=—a fop.

=Jenny=—a spinning machine.

=Jepson=—a one-piece suit of clothes for men, invented by Edgar Jepson,
an Englishman, at about the turn of the present century—a sort of
combination coat and trousers intended mainly for work and play wear,
rather than for social intercourse, the inventor himself wearing, then,
the regulation attire. Also called “loose skins”.

=Jerkin=—a sort of waistcoat, still in use in North of England; formerly
a jacket, short coat, or upper-doublet.

=Jersey=—a sort of sweater.

=Jersey cloth=—a stockinet c. of silk and wool or wool-and-cotton; very
elastic. Compare Stockinet.

=Jet=—a variety of hard, dense, black mineral coal, capable of a
brilliant polish, used in making buttons, ornaments, mourning jewelry,
etc. Also called black amber.

=Jetted pocket=—in tailoring, a slit or slasht p., having a small strip
or piece of the material seamed on and turned over inside, forming a
cord at the turned edge and acting as a facing within. Also called
Corded p.

=Jeunesse doree=—gay youth.

=Jewel case=—a container for jewelry.

=Jeweler’s rouge=—hematite (red oxid of iron) ground to an impalpable
powder; used for polishing.

=Jeweler’s sawdust=—finely grained boxwood s.; used as a cleansing and
drying agent on gems and jewelry.

=Jewelry=—ostentatious bedizenment.

=Jiji japa=—(1) the fiber of a South American plant of same name, made
into hats much like Panama hats, but considerably cheaper; (2) a hat of
this fiber. (Pronounced hehe happa.)

=Jilted pocket=—see Jetted p. (Corruption.)

=Job lot=—general term applied to odd lots of merchandise set apart for
sale at reduced prices.

=Jobber=—(1) one who purchases merchandise in large lots and resells in
smaller; (2) a contractor for a mill’s output.

=Jock-strap=—vulgarism for the plain suspensory customarily worn by
athletes. See Suspensory.

=Jockey cap=—a small skull c. of silk or satin with a prodigious visor
of same material, in the color or colors of the horse’s owner.

=Jockey club=—a well-known perfume once quite popular with men.

=Jockey lift=—a metal device used in drawing on livery boots, serving at
the same time to hold the breeches securely in place while boot is being
pulled on.

=Johnny Jones hat=—see Telescope h.—it’s a bit more rakish.

=Join=—tailor’s term for seams generally, and specially for the notcht
or markt parts of a seam.

=Joining paste=—a preparation used by actors to blend the wigband with
the forehead in making up.

=Join-up=—the process of sewing the two halves of a coat or trousers
together.

=Joseph=—the caped surtout of olden days; a riding coat; also called
wrap-rascal (qv).

=Josette=—a heavy twilled cotton cloth similar to khaki, used for riding
breeches, sporting wear, etc.

=Josie=—see Joseph.

=Jour=—tailoring workshop abbreviation for journeyman (qv).

=Journeyman=—a workman who has completed his apprenticeship or learned
his trade.

=Joury=—a local familiar name applied to fellow “jours”.

=Jouvin=—trade diminutiv for gloves made by Jouvin et Cie., Grenoble,
France. Xavier Jouvin was the inventor of an automatic glove cutting
machine.

=Jowhir=—the “watering” of a Damascus blade; “damascening”.

=Judge’s gown=—a plain, open g. of black silk, without collar, and with
wide, flowing sleeves.

=Judge’s wig=—a large, full-bottomed w. of precise curls, with a flap
hanging down in front on each side of the face. (English.)

=Judgment=—a favorit word with cutters in criticism of (tailoring)
“systems”—especially those who make great pretensions but who do not as
regularly “make good”.

=Judicial gown=—see Judge’s g.

=Jumper=—a workman’s loose outer-jacket or blouse.

=Jumper=—a mechanical pressing machine used in clothing factories, so
called because the operator jumps on a lever to secure extra pressure.

=Juniors=—trade term for boy’s clothing, generally.

=Junk=—(1) any miscellaneous lot or collection of goods; (2) goods of
very inferior quality.

=Jupe=—a heavy jacket. (Same as below?)

=Jupon=—a sort of surcoat without sleeves, tight fitting, but shorter
than the hauberk (qv) over which it was worn; almost always made of rich
stuffs and blazoned with the arms of the wearer. (About 1400 A. D.)

=Justice’s gown=—see Judge’s g.


                                   K

=Kaikai=—a thin, plain-woven, cheap Japanese silk fabric, usually in
warp stripes.

=Kanaka wolf=—(1) a w. of the Sandwich Islands, or loosely, of any of
the South Sea Islands; (2) the fur thereof.

=Kangaroo=—a herbivorous macropodoid, marsupial mammal of Australasia,
whose hide, when tanned, becomes a soft, supple, durable, shoe leather.

=Karat=—see Carat.

=Kemp=—(1) straight, coarse, shiny fibers or “dead hairs”, conspicuous
in coarse-bred wool; (2) a mixture of short, coarse, white hairs and
wool fibers, occurring chiefly where the fleece is lightest and
shortest.

=Kennel coat=—see Paddock.

=Kentucky jeans=—a superior quality of jeans (qv).

=Kerchief=—see Handkerchief and Neckerchief.

=Kersey=—a heavy, all-wool cloth, compact, firm and pliable, gigged and
fulled to a degree completely covering and concealing the warp and weft
threads, the face finisht with a fine, short, close nap; of quality
depending on the wool used, the cheaper grades often being thickened
with flocks. Also a twill woven cloth of cotton warp and wool weft,
similarly finisht, used for the cheaper grades of clothing.

=Kerseymere=—(1) a fine, twilled, woolen cloth of peculiar texture, 1
thread of warp and 2 of weft being always above; (2) a name sometimes
given to cassimere.

=Kerseynette=—cassinette.

=Kevenhuller=—a cockt hat with the crown wholly hidden, the middle of
the front brim being the highest point; this succeeded the cockt hat
(qv) of the 1770’s.

=Key chain=—a metal chain for attaching Mr. Staylate’s bunch of keys to
a trouser’s button.

=Key ring=—a more or less complex safety device from which keys are
easily lost.

=Khaki=—a browny-drab or dust-colored cloth of cotton or cotton and
linen, of stout texture, compactly woven with a slight twill, adopted by
various governments for field service dress; also used by civilians for
riding breeches, hunting clothes, etc.

=Khaki cap=—(=marine corps=) for all officers, of same pattern as blue
undress c., the base of the c. all around to a depth of ¼ in. of dark
blue cloth, a ½ in. black patent leather strap, bronze corps device and
buttons.

=Kicker=—a customer who doesn’t seem to be satisfied.

=Kicking for a job=—tailor’s term for applicants for work.

=Kicks=—slang for trousers.

=Kicksie=—one of many names for children’s romping clothes, especially
of the bloomer order; sometimes applied to drawers, pantalets, etc.

=Kid=—leather made from young goats for gloves, shoes, etc.

=Kid=—wool classification term. See Wool.

=Kids=—kid gloves.

=Kihei=—a sort of mantle, about 6 feet square, of tapa bark (see Malo)
once (and perhaps occasionally now) worn by both sexes in Hawaii; by the
men as a sort of upper garment, by tying 2 corners on one side together
and putting the head thru the opening so made.

=Kike=—contemptuous term for unscrupulous, tricky Hebrew merchants and
manufacturers; a term little used outside of the apparel trades and
seldom heard in connection with large concerns.

=Kill=—in tailoring, a garment that cannot be made satisfactory, after
repeated alterations is said to be “a kill from the start”; a misfit;
any garment not made according to specifications and which must be
replaced by a new one.

=Kilmarnock=—a Scotch cap.

=Kilt=—(1) originally that part of a Scotchman’s belted plaid which hung
below the waist; modernly, a separate garment like a short plaited
petticoat reaching from the waist to the knees, commonly made of clan
tartan goods; (2) a children’s garment like the modern k. of any
material—a step between dresses and pants.

=Kilt hose=—long, heavy, woolen h., usually with fancy tops that are
rolled or turned back several times to form a sort of cuff at about the
hight of the calf.

=Kimona=—in old Japan the characteristic dress of both sexes; nowadays,
in this land, the garment that makes a woman look dowdy to her husband
and entrancing to someone else’s husband.

=Kip=—see Kips.

=Kips=—the skins of yearlings and animals larger than calves.

=Kiss-me-quick=—a curl or fashioned lock of hair on one side of the
forehead.

=Kit bag=—a commodious leather traveling b., having a flat, rectangular
bottom and sloping sides.

=Kit pack=—a sort of half boot of the long, long ago.

=Kite tail=—term applied to a make of athletic underwear, having the
skirt (of the shirt) cut away over the hips, leaving flaps or tails in
front and behind.

=K K=—tailor’s hoglatin for sawhorsy legs.

=Kleptomaniac=—a shoplifter (qv) of social position.

=Klondyke cap=—a c. usually made of fur, having a round crown, a large
visor and ear tabs connected behind and tied over the top when not worn
down.

=Knapsack=—a pouch or case of leather or stout cloth, used by soldiers,
travelers, prospectors, etc., for carrying light personal luggage,
usually worn strapt to the back.

=Knee band=—the lower hem or finishing-piece on knickerbockers or
breeches; made to close with buttons, straps or lacings.

=Knee breeches=—same as Breeches. Compare Knickerbockers.

=Knee breeches=—the first important event in a boy’s life.

=Knee-buckle=—old name for short trousers or breeches for dress wear.

=Knee buckles=—objects of splendor when breeches were in form; oftenest
of silver.

=Knee cap=—an external covering for the knees, worn as a protection by
carpenters, carpet layers, et al.

=Knee drawers=—reaching only to the knee, specially devised for summer
comfort.

=Knee protectors=—shields of leather or other material, worn, when not
out of sight, by youngsters when playing marbles and other destructiv
innocent games.

=Knee silk=—thin, tough s. sewed inside knees of trousers to relieve the
strain and prevent bagging.

=Knee staking=—a process in leather manufacture, where the dyed and
dried skins are still further stretcht, loosened and made pliable by
pressure of a workman’s bare knee on the leather brought quickly down
the stake.

=Knee warmers=—stockinet or other knitted elastic, wool, silk or cotton
coverings for persons afflicted with cold, weak or rheumatic knee
joints.

=Kneipp linen=—an elastic, mesh-knitted, linen fabric used for
undergarments.

=Knickerbocker=—weaving term for ornamental effects produced by using
yarns of two single threads twisted and containing added loose wool at
intervals, which, when woven, gives a shaggy or lumpy appearance. See
Bourette and Boucle.

=Knickerbocker drawers=—knee length.

=Knickerbockers=—knee breeches with loose, baggy knees, usually fastened
with strap and band, instead of close-fitting cuffs. Compare Breeches.

=Knife lanyard=—a sling of knitted, bleacht white cotton, worn by
enlisted men in the navy, long enough when around the neck to allow a
knife to be used with arm extended.

=Knights of Pythias coat=—same as Masonic Sir Knights c., but with 9
buttons instead of 11.

=Knights Templar coat=—see Sir Knights c.

=Knit=—See Knitting.

=Knitted cloth=—a fine, closely knitted fabric of silk or mercerized
cotton yarn, made in Saxony and but little known in this country;
principal uses gloves and underwear for the European market.

=Knitted vest=—a sort of cardigan jacket or sweater of any material and
degree of fineness, fashioned much like an ordinary waistcoat.

=Knitting=—the process of forming a fabric out of a single thread by
means of needles on which the thread or yarn is placed in a succession
of loops, so arranged in rows that each loop in one row passes thru the
adjacent loop in the preceding row.

=Knitting machine=—any machine for knitting fabrics or garments, usually
employing a series of barbed or hooked needles.

=Knitting wool=—fleece too long and coarse for fine weaving purposes.
See Wool.

=Knock-kneed=—knees that turn inwardly or rub against each other in
walking. See K.-k.

=Knockabout=—any rough-and-ready clothes or garment; more specifically,
a loose overcoat or “slip-on”.

=Knocker=—the man who finds fault with this book because he happens to
know more about a certain subject than is given in the definition. This
is a book of “handy reference”—not a text book.

=Knopt yarn=—weft yarn distinguisht by lumps or knots, usually of
different color, at uniform or varying distances thruout its length.
(=Knopped.=)

=Knot=—a cravat with flowing ends, tied the same as a four-in-hand.

=Knuckle duster=—a metal weapon used to protect the knuckles and to add
force to a blow. See Brass k.; also called (slang) “knucks” (qv).

=Knuckle mitt=—a small cushion of padded leather, with a strap, worn for
punching bag practise and exhibitions.

=Knucks=—thug’s finger jewelry, so constructed as to be of much efficacy
in a fracas.

=Krimmer=—Persian lamb; the curly gray fur of commerce.

=Kris=—a large dagger, used by the Malays—Englisht “crease”.

=Kt=—abbreviation for karat or carat (qv).


                                   L

=Label=—a badge, stamp or any distinguishing mark, affixt to articles of
merchandise.

=Lace=—once used for men’s neckwear. See encyclopedia if you wish to
know more.

=Lace stay=—a piece of tape or similar material placed between the
thicknesses of the leather in the uppers of shoes to strengthen the
uppers where the lacing eyelets or hooks are inserted.

=Lace-up boots=—Briticism for laced shoes.

=Lace work=—trade term for open work designs in hosiery.

=Lacrosse gloves=—same as Hockey g.

=Ladies-cloth=—a fine, wide flannel, slightly napt, similar to
broadcloth.

=Lagniappe=—something thrown in over and above; good measure. Current in
New Orleans—but fast disappearing from use. See Brotus.

=Laguna=—trade name for a variety of wood from the Philippine islands,
used for walking sticks.

=Laid-on flap=—in tailoring a f. not sewed into the pocket opening but
laid on above it, usually wider than the opening, as the side pockets of
frock coats. See In-and-out f.

=Laid-on velvet collar=—in tailoring a c. partly of velvet and partly of
the material of the garment, the former laid upon the cloth but not
covering it, usually to within half an inch or so of the edge, the
exposed cloth forming a sort of border or frame. Compare Inlaid c.

=Laid wool=—w. clipped from sheep that have been greased or tarred as a
protection from the weather.

=L’Aiglon coat=—a sort of cutaway frock c. made familiar by Sarah
Bernhardt when she appeared in Rostand’s play of that name as Duc de
Reichstadt.

=Lamb’s wool=—the first clip from young sheep. Compare Wether w.

=Lamps=—spectacles or eye-glasses.

=Lance=—textil term for woven effects like minute darts, points, specks,
etc.

=Lap-and-foot robe=—an adjustable rubber or cloth lap r. for automobile
wear, serving as over-trousers, robe and foot-muff.

=Lap-board=—an oblong board, round at the ends, laid on the lap of the
workman, upon which the seams and other parts of a garment are presst in
the process of making.

=Lap front=—a straight standing shirt collar without front opening, but
lapping one end over the other when buttoned.

=Lap robe=—a rug for driving or traveling.

=Lap seam=—a s. made by overlapping or laying on, instead of turning in;
one edge laid or lapt over the other and sewn twice. See Double-stitcht
s.

=Lap seam=—(glove term) see Pique s.

=Lapel=—(1) the length of a dress coat in front, or from the gorge seam
down to the waist seam; (2) the narrow strip—square at the lower end and
angular at the upper end—which is sewed to the front of double-breasted
frock coats; (3) the roll or “lay-over” of the front of a sack coat or
any coat; the most observable part of a coat collar.

=Lapel button=—coat jewelry, usually bearing lodge emblem.

=Lapel fob=—a watch f. or short chain of metal, leather, etc., worn
attacht to the l. buttonhole, the watch being carried in the outside
breast pocket of coat; also called Watch Albert.

=Lapel forepart=—the sewed-on lapel of a double-breasted frock coat. See
L. seam and Frock coat.

=Lapel seam=—the s. caused by sewing the back edge of the lapel strip to
the front edge of the forepart.

=Lapidary=—one who cuts, grinds, polishes and mounts precious stones and
other gems.

=Lappet=—a small lap or flap.

=Lappet weaving=—a method of producing small figures or designs on
cloth, having the appearance of being darned or embroidered; special
warp threads being introduced and made to cross small sections of the
regular warp, manipulated by a lappet or needle attachment.

=Lares and Penates=—one’s household gods; loosely one’s belongings of
all sorts.

=Last=—a wooden form on which shoes are made.

=Lasting=—a strong, closely woven, double-twill, worsted fabric, mostly
used for buttons and shoe tops.

=Lasting=—the process of giving shape to a shoe.

=Lasting button=—a b. made on a mold covered with lasting cloth; worn on
evening dress almost exclusively.

=Latch key=—a door k. that sometimes does not fit.

=Latchet=—a shoe lace or fastener of a sandal.

=Latin cassock=—differing from the Anglican c. in that it buttons all
the way down the front with the cincture knotted forward of the left
hip.

=Launder=—to wash and iron, as articles of clothing.

=Laundry=—the place of destruction.

=Laundry bag=—better than a newspaper for your soiled linen.

=Laundryman=—keeper of the place of torment.

=Laundry marks=—causes of profanity.

=Lavant=—see Wig.

=Lavender=—a nice, clean scent for linen.

=Laventine=—a thin silk used for sleeve linings.

=Lawyer’s=—see Wig.

=Lay=—in garment making the disposition of the paper patterns upon the
cloth prior to cutting, so arranged as to effect economy of material,
achieve exact matching of patterns, etc.

=Lay down collar=—a low, folded linen shirt c.

=Lay-out=—see Lay.

=Lay-over=—see Lapel.

=Lay-up=—in shirt collar making the successiv layers of linen or cotton
cloth laid out on tables and from which by means of patterns and a sharp
knife a number of collars or parts are cut at one time.

=Layette=—a fussy outfit of clothes, etc., provided in anticipation of
units affecting the birthrate.

=Leaf=—in tailoring, a word used to describe the folded part of a collar
(exclusiv of the lapels). The ordinary coat collar consists of an outer
l., or that part folded over, and an inner l., or that part on the
inside of the fold, also called the “stand”. Used alone the word leaf
means outer l.

=Leaf=—a division of warp threads in weaving for the insertion of the
weft; a loom harness.

=Leather=—cant term for pocketbook—to “pull off leather”, is, therefore,
to steal pocketbooks or purses.

=Leathers=—colloquial for coachmen’s kidskin livery breeches.

=Left dress=—the right way. See Dress.

=Left-overs=—goods carried over from one season or “sale” to another.

=Left twill=—weaving term indicating that the direction of the rib (as
of serge, cheviot, etc.) leads from the bottom of the cloth (held
lengthwise) upwardly to the left. See Right t.

=Leg irons=—climbing irons; also shackles.

=Leggin=—a covering for the leg like a long gaiter; a protector in cold
or wet weather or outdoor sports. (=Legging.=) See Puttee.

=Leghorn=—a light-weight hat straw, usually in herringbone weave.

=Leipzig dye=—an unusually rich color (and finish) given to sealskins
and other furs dyed in Leipzig, which it seems impossible to obtain
elsewhere. Compare London d.

=Let out=—to make larger or longer.

=Letter-carrier’s uniform=—see Postman’s u.

=Leur=—a hatter’s brushing pad.

=Levantine=—a stout twilled silk, each side finisht equally but of
different colors.

=Levelling=—a mechanical process in shoemaking, following the operation
of Goodyear stitching, whereby the turn-up of the channel is prest down
or leveled by means of two rolls moving automatically back and forth
with a pressure of about 5000 pounds.

=Levy=—eleven pence, the value of the Spanish real, which circulated in
this country some years ago. (Pronounced levvy.)

=Lid=—a hat—slang, of course.

=Lid=—a pocket flap.

=Lieutenant’s uniform=—(=navy=) see Special full dress, Full dress,
Dress, Service dress, Evening dress, Mess dress, Undress; (=marine
corps=) Special full dress, Full dress, Mess dress, Undress, Field
dress; (=revenue cutter service=) Full dress, Dress, Service dress,
Social full dress; (=army=) Full dress, Dress u., White u., Service u.
See also variations.

=Lieutenant general’s uniform=—see Full dress, Dress u., White u.,
Service u. Also see variants.

=Life belt=—a belt of inflated rubber, or one containing cork, for use
as a life preserver.

=Life preserver=—a cork-filled belt, ring or jacket worn, if obtainable,
after accidents at sea.

=Lifters=—cant for crutches.

=Ligne=—a unit of measurement: ¹⁄₁₁ of an inch (ribbon measure), ¹⁄₄₀ of
an inch (button measure), etc.; the rib of a braid; as 6 ribs is 6
ligne, etc.

=Lily irons=—confederate handcuffs.

=Limericks=—a name once given to gloves of such delicate thinness, that
altho they would fit a large hand, they would fold up into the compass
of a walnut shell. From the town of that name, once famous for its glove
industry. For the nature of the leather see Morts and Slinks.

=Limestone wool=—powdered limestone mixt with chemicals, subjected to
heat and strong air-blast, coming out as fluffy white wool, which is
woven into a flexible fabric used for clothing.

=Liming=—a process in leather preparation following that of sweating
(qv), whereby roots of hairs are loosened.

=Line=—the fine, long fiber of flax, separated from the tow by heckling.

=Line=—see Ligne.

=Lined gold=—see Rolled g.

=Linen=—general name for fabrics woven from yarns spun from the fiber of
flax; nothing like reading an encyclopedic article.

=Linen mesh=—a net or cellular sort of weave, of linen, used for
undergarments.

=Linen prover=—see Counting glass.

=Linen test=—see Breaking t., Burning t., Oil t., Sulfuric acid t.,
Thru-lighting t., Untwisting t.

=Lining=—general term for materials used for covering the inner side of
a garment or anything. In men’s clothing usually silk, Italian cloth,
farmer’s satin, serge, alpaca, silesia, etc.

=Links=—(1) shirt cuffs not closed or overlapping at the ends when
buttoned; (2) double-headed buttons worn with link cuffs, of the
dumb-bell or loose-link variety; (3) two coat buttons joined by workt
strands of silk thread, worn sometimes in dress and frock coats, also in
open vented sleeves.

=Linocord=—proprietary name given to a style of buttonhole for collars
and cuffs having a line of heavy thread or cord (whence name) past and
worked around the aperture.

=Linsey-woolsey=—a stout, medium-weight cloth made with linen warp and
wool filling; a homespun and homewoven fabric of colonial days, now
practically obsolete.

=Lirripipe=—a sort of tippet, tempus Richard II.

=Lisle thread=—a fine, hard twisted, compact t. of long staple cotton
prepared by combing instead of by carding, employed in the manufacture
of fine hosiery, underwear, gloves, etc.

=List=—the selvage of woven textil fabrics.

=List slippers=—cloth s.

=Litter=—a temporary bed upon which a wounded or sick person is carried.

=Little Lord Fauntleroy=—an impossible kid that started a clothes cult.

=Live net=—a netted-mesh bag for bringing home fish, made much like a
woman’s shopping bag.

=Liver pad=—slang for chest protector (qv).

=Livery=—the dress or uniform of servants.

=Livery=—see Wool.

=Livery cloth=—see Boxcloth.

=Livery tailor=—one who makes a specialty of and whose business consists
largely if not entirely of the making of dress and undress livery and
uniforms.

=Livery undress=—groom’s frock or sack stable suit, made of tan, brown
or black mixt whipcord. The frock coat may be worn with either trousers
or breeches and leggings.

=Living-in=—term describing the manner of employment of English shop
assistants who are generally boarded with or at the expense of their
employers in quarters above the stores or in specially maintained
dormitories or barracks; a survival of the old system of apprenticeship,
but which, under pressure of public opinion and modern business ideas,
is dying away to the greater independence and welfare of the clerks.

=Lizzie=—a mental dude.

=Llama=—a soft, glossy, woolen suiting woven with a fine twill; a finer
and more expensiv cloth than vicuna (which it resembles), properly made
from the fleece of the Llama goat, tho largely mixt with cheaper wool.

=Loaded=—dyer’s term for fabrics surcharged with gums and other
dressings for extra or fraudulent weight.

=Loading=—see Weighting.

=Lock front=—trade term for shirt collars of the folded variety having
one blade or end so shaped and extended as to go within the opposit fold
and hold the collar firmly in position or “lock” it. See also Meeting
folder and Spaced front.

=Lock-out=—the shutting up of a mill, factory or store because the
owners will not agree to demands of employes or because latter would not
agree to work on terms offered by the employers.

=Lock stitch=—see Chain s.

=Lockram=—a cheap, coarse linen fabric, originally made in Locrenan,
Brittany.

=Locust=—familiar for policeman’s club; a night stick.

=Loden=—a waterproof cloth made by the peasants in the Tyrol from wool
of mountain sheep; resembles Irish frieze, and is mostly used for
knockabout shirts for mountain climbing, hunting, prospecting, etc.

=Logwood=—the blue-black dye obtained from the tree of that name.

=Loin cloth=—complete attire in hot, uncivilized countries—among the
natives.

=London=—the mere name was once virtually deified and counted the
arbiter elegantiarum in men’s wear.

=London dye=—trade term for the rich brown d. of sealskins, especially
employed when the skins are actually dyed in London. Compare Leipzig d.

=London fashions=—a term of conjuration used by tailors and readymaders
alike but having no significance apart from the casuistry of the words.

=London letter=—a fashion l. written in New York or anywhere but London.

=London shrunk=—see Cold water s.

=London toe=—in shoemaking, a medium broad t.

=Long dresses=—the clothes of early infancy.

=Long measures=—general term for those systems of tailors’ measurements
characterized by the taking of as few and as comprehensiv measurements
as necessary to lay out a pattern, which measurements are subdivided in
drafting, as required to give other dimensions not taken on the victim
on the block. Compare Short m. and Superlativ m.

=Long moire=—m. antique (qv).

=Long neckt=—see Low-n.

=Long pants=—the first important event in a boy’s life.

=Long roll=—tailor’s term for lapels or revers buttoning low and usually
soft-prest.

=Long-slim=—trade term for readymade garments designed to fit tall,
slender persons. Compare Slim, Long-stout and Longs.

=Long staple=—having a long fiber. See Cotton and Wool. Compare Short s.

=Long-stout=—trade term for readymade garments designed to fit corpulent
persons of more than average hight.

=Long tail=—see Wig.

=Long togs=—nautical term for civilian clothes.

=Long vamp=—Synonymous with whole v., as compared with a short or
cut-off v., a whole v., not having that part of the v. covering the
toes, about the size of a tip on the ordinary shoe, cut off. By cutting
off a little of the v. at this point a saving is made in the leather,
and, therefore, in the cost of a shoe; but with some leathers, however,
it makes a better shoe.

=Long wool=—fleece 4 to 10 inches long. See Wool.

=Longs=—trade term for readymade garments designed to fit tall men.
Compare Slim, Long-slim and Long-stout.

=Longs=—early familiar term for pantaloons or trousers. Compare Shorts.

=Lonsdale=—a brand of shirting muslin and cambric.

=Looking glass=—a reflector of vanities. See Mirror.

=Loom=—a machine in which yarn or thread is woven into a fabric, by the
crossing of threads called chain or warp, running lengthwise, with
others called weft, woof or filling, running crosswise.

=Loom card=—a perforated pattern card, such as is used on the Jacquard
loom.

=Loom figured=—textil term for patterns or effects produced by
arrangement of warp and weft threads in contradistinction to those made
by printing; “self-figured”.

=Loom harness=—that portion of a loom which so operates or acts upon the
warp threads as to make the opening thru which the shuttle flies.

=Loomask=—a kind of half mask. See Loup.

=Looney=—an oblong, flattened pad, used in pressing and giving form to
the collar, lapels and shoulders of a coat.

=Loop stitch=—see Chain s.

=Loopt yarn=—see Curled y.

=Looscarf=—proprietary name for a linen shirt collar, of the double or
high-banded order, so made that a scarf or tie slips around in it
easily, without the tension characterising the ordinary style of collar.

=Loose-fitting=—by no means tight nor close; free; boxy.

=Loose links=—linkt cuff buttons not rigidly connected, but held
together by means of a fine chain, a large link, or a separable slip
catch.

=Loose skins=—a sort of union outer-suit. See Jepson.

=Lord Chumley=—the cape overcoat popular in this country about 1890,
from the play of that name; still popular abroad as a traveling coat.

=Loretto=—a fine silk material largely used for waistcoats about 1767.

=Lot number=—a stock n. given to goods for identification purposes.

=Louchettes=—goggles permitting vision only directly in front, used for
strabismus.

=Loud=—gaily drest; flashy.

=Louisine=—a fine twilled silk fabric, similar to surah, but softer and
firmer.

=Lounge jacket=—English name for our single-breasted sack coat.

=Lounge suit=—a sack s.

=Lounging robe=—a long, loose, house gown.

=Loup=—a light mask or half mask, usually of silk, worn at masquerades,
etc.

=Louse-trap=—vulgar for a fine-tooth comb.

=Love knot=—see True lovers’ k.

=Love lock=—a long lock of hair curled and tied with ribbons, worn
hanging in front of the shoulder: an early 17th century fashion for men.
See also Ear lock.

=Lovelace=—a dandified libertine with graceful, agreeable manners.

=Low common=—wool classification term. See Wool.

=Low-cuts=—see Low quarters and Oxfords.

=Low middling=—see Cotton classification.

=Low-neckt=—a garment is said to be “low-neckt” or “long-neckt” when the
gorge in front is cut low. (=L.-necked.=)

=Low quarters=—trade term for low-cut shoes, as Oxfords, pumps, etc.

=Low-shouldered=—the extreme opposit of “high-shouldered”.

=Luggage=—British for baggage (qv).

=Lumbermen’s socks=—a knitted s. of extra heavy wool, close and compact,
usually knee length, for wear in boots or with arctics.

=Lunatic fringe=—see Idiot f.

=Lunch bag=—same as Ammunition b.

=Luncheon basket=—a lined, dust-proof wicker b. or hamper fitted with
dishes, cooking utensils, etc., for coaching parties, etc.

=Luster=—a low grade or imitation alpaca cloth, often with wool weft in
place of alpaca.

=Lustering=—a mechanical process of giving to cloth, usually by steam
and pressure, a smooth and glossy surface sufficiently durable to
withstand wear.

=Lustrene=—a thin, twilled cotton fabric, mercerized or finisht in
imitation of silk, and employed as a lining material.

=Lustring=—a soft, plain-woven silk fabric, widely worn from late 17th
to middle of 19th century. See Lutestring.

=Lustro-fiber=—same as art silk—wood pulp.

=Lutestring=—(1) the old-fashioned, glossy silk stuff our ancestors had
their gay clothes made of; (2) also a narrow silk ribbon, without
selvage, used for eye-glass cords by the spectacular.

=Lynx=—a feline mammal whose fur is largely used in making winter
garments.


                                   M

=Macaroni=—an obsolete dude. This word dates from 1770, when a number of
traveled, idle young cads founded the “Macaroni Club” in London, the
name standing for all that was extreme or grotesque in dress; one of
their greatest affectations was a high-pointed peakt roll of craped and
powdered hair, that women also affected, as well as great breastknots of
flowers. The word had considerable vogue in America in Revolutionary
times, and m. waistcoats, m. hats, m. purses, etc., were quite popular;
the term also occurs in our national “Yankee Doodle”.

=Machine buttonhole=—produced by machine in imitation of handmade b. and
distinguisht principally by a uniformity impossible in hand work and
often superior thereto in neatness and strength tho not necessarily so
in wear; also considerably cheaper.

=Machine twist=—a 3 cord, silk thread twisted to the left so that as it
runs thru the machine needle the tension causes the thread to tighten up
and work or sink into the cloth. See also Sewing silk and Buttonhole t.

=Mackinaw=—a sort of extra heavy woolen blanketing, well fulled, woven
in fancy patterns, employed for hunters and lumbermen’s coats, etc.,
also as linings for same.

=Mackinaw flannel=—an extra heavy, all-wool fabric (16 to 24 oz), used
by lumbermen, miners, etc., for overshirts, underwear, etc.; usually
scarlet and navy-blue.

=Mackinaw=—a coarse, pliable white straw used in hats.

=Mackintosh=—a long, loose overcoat of waterproof material, for wear in
stormy weather.

=Macnab Harris=—a hand-loomed tweed made of mill-spun yarn, exhibiting a
uniformity of color not possible with homespun yarn.

=Maco=—trade name for Egyptian cotton—long staple, smooth, strong,
glossy, easily dyed.

=Madder=—a vegetable red dye.

=Made=—general trade term expressiv of superiority, claimed or conceded,
as “that is a made coat”, meaning well—not indifferently—made. Compare
Shop m.

=Madras=—a superior variety of gingham, but of heavier weight and
frequently corded.

=Magellan jacket=—a watch coat with hood, worn by sailors in high
latitudes.

=Magnetic hat=—see Wilsonia magnetic h.

=Magnetic ring=—a r. of magnetized iron, supposed to have virtues in
rheumatism and other such light ailments.

=Mail carrier’s uniform=—see Postman’s u.

=Mail order=—a sale transacted by mail.

=Major=—see Wig.

=Major’s uniform=—(=army=) see Full dress, Dress u., White u., Service
u.; (=marine corps=) Special full dress, Full dress, Mess dress,
Undress, Field dress. Also see variants.

=Major general’s uniform=—(=army=) see Full dress, Dress u., White u.,
Service u.; (=marine corps=) Special full dress, Full dress, Mess dress,
Undress, Field dress. Also see variants.

=Make-up=—grease paints, powders, gums, patches, bits of hair, etc.,
used by theatrical performers in making up for their characters.

=Make-up box=—a japanned metal box carried by theatrical people for the
purpose of impressing beholders with an appearance of Wall street
affluence.

=Making the lay=—tailoring term for the act of laying out the paper
patterns on the cloth for cutting in the most advantageous manner.

=Malacca=—a species of cane, imported from Sumatra, used for walking
sticks.

=Malo=—a sort of girdle prepared from the inner bark of the tapa tree
(Broussonetia) a foot or more in width and several yards long, worn by
men in Hawaii before civilization swept over that fair land.

=Mamos=—magnificent feather cloaks worn by native kings and chiefs of
the Hawaiian islands.

=Man-milliner=—a designer or seller of female apparel; often used
contemptuously.

=Man o’ war cap=—a c. having a wide, extended flat top on a rim fitting
to the head; the uniform c. for naval and merchant seamen; also popular
for children.

=Manacles=—unfashionable cuffs.

=Mandillion=—a sort of loose jerkin or doublet.

=Manicure=—a bold, young female person of enormous pulchritude who
commits felonious assaults upon your fingernails, and embarrasses you if
you are not used to it.

=Maniple=—an ecclesiastical vestment, similar to a short stole, worn
pendant from the left wrist by priest, deacon and subdeacon at mass.

=Manipulated=—term applied to fabrics which in weaving are mixt with
some inferior substance, such as cotton with wool or silk, shoddy with
wool, etc. Sometimes the adulterants are carded in with the better
fibers, sometimes straight yarns of the baser stuffs are used. See
Cotton cheat and Mercerized.

=Mannheim gold=—a brassy alloy for cheap jewelry, composed of 80 parts
of copper, 20 of zinc, and sometimes with a trace of tin.

=Mantaletta=—a sleeveless garment of silk or woolen stuff, reaching to
the knees, covering the rochet, worn by cardinals, bishops and other
prelates.

=Manteau Armenian=—see Armenian cloak.

=Mantle=—a cloak.

=Manufacturer=—a producer of commodities, who is also sometimes (more or
less erroneously) lookt upon as a dispenser of graft (qv).

=Manufacturers’ sale=—a merchandising subterfuge; a misnomer nine times
out of ten.

=Marabout=—a species of thrown silk. See Throwing.

=Marching shoes=—(=army=) for enlisted men: of russet tanned grain calf
leather, thoroly stuft; worn with service uniform.

=Marching uniform=—see Service u., Dress u., etc.

=Marienbad hat=—see Tyrolean h.

=Marine corps officer’s cape=—of dark blue cloth, cut three-quarters of
a circle and reaching to the tips of the fingers, lined with scarlet
cloth, closed by 4 small buttons in fly, with hooks and eyes at neck,
and with frog and loop as with overcoat; a detachable velvet collar with
which the c. may be worn by itself by all officers when not on duty with
troops under arms.

=Marine corps overcoats=—for major general commandant and all other
officers, a semi-fitting sack o. of dark blue cloth, lined with scarlet
cloth, reaching 9 to 12 inches from the ground, closed with black mohair
frogs and loops of mohair cord four-across, with a long loop and frogs
attacht to fronts of shoulder; vertical pockets; rank indicated as
prescribed; sword worn outside. For non-commissioned officers, drummers
and privates: double-breasted, of sky-blue kersey, shaped to the body,
extending 6 to 8 inches below the knee, 16 inch vent in back,
stand-or-fall collar, 2 rows of 7 marine corps buttons on front, scarlet
flannel lining; a one-piece cape to match. Other details per
specifications. For leader of the band: same as prescribed for a first
lieutenant, with same cape. For second leader, drum-major and musicians:
same as for other enlisted men of the corps, the chevrons of second
leader and drum-major to be on the cuffs.

=Mark down=—an ostensible price-reduction; a triumph of the ready
ingenuity of the advertisement writer.

=Marker=—in ready-to-wear clothes manufacturing a workman who lays the
patterns on the cloth and marks the cloth for the cutters.

=Marking ink=—employed by laundries to spoil one’s linen.

=Marny tweeds=—see Blarney t.

=Marriage ring=—a simple gold band, emblematic of bondage.

=Marseilles=—a heavy, stout-corded or figured bleacht cotton material
similar to pique, used for waistcoats, etc.

=Marsella=—a stout, twill woven linen fabric, usually full bleacht and
finisht without dressing.

=Marten=—a species of sable, the pelts being largely used in the
manufacture of fur garments.

=Mary Ann collar=—British for the highband, folded or double shirt c.

=Mary Walkers=—trousers; derived from Dr. Mary Walker adopting as part
of her dress a modified form of this article of male attire.

=Mascaro=—a preparation used by actors for changing the color of hair,
beard or eye-brows in making up.

=Masher=—a dandified sumpinorother, often incarcerated when discovered;
a Lizzie.

=Mask=—a device of cloth, paper or other material to cover the face or
eyes or to conceal one’s identity and sentiments.

=Mask cap=—a c. for automobile wear, with a covering for the face with
goggles secured therein.

=Masonic uniform=—see Sir Knights u., Commander’s u.

=Masquerade costume=—suit yourself.

=Master’s gown=—usually silk, long closed sleeves, worn with hood.

=Match coat=—a rough sort of c. of fur or coarse woolen cloth worn by
the pilgrim settlers.

=Match safe=—a pocket container for matches, often obscene, of gold,
silver, etc.

=Matelasse=—a backt or double cloth, the face of which is woven with a
pattern having the effect of being wadded or quilted; usually of silk
and worsted with a backing of cotton or wool-and-cotton; employed for
waistcoats, house jackets, etc.

=Matt=—a lusterless or dull surface, as m. kid. Also spelt mat.

=Maud=—a traveling rug or shawl.

=Mauve=—a reddish-purple anilin dye.

=McKay sewed=—in shoemaking meaning soles and uppers sewed together on
the McKay shoe sewing machine.

=Measuring cape=—a device, made of cotton or linen material, shaped to
fit around the neck and to drop over one shoulder, front and back,
reaching about to the waist, appropriately marked with scales of
measurement; the invention of a tailor by name of Beatty, who claims it
yields more accurate results than is possible by square and tape; the
device is also applicable to drafting.

=Measuring stick=—a rule, with one fixt and one movable upright piece,
for measuring the foot for shoes.

=Measuring tape=—a tailor’s t. measure, usually 56 to 60 inches long,
often longer.

=Mechanician’s suit=—any strong, servicable suit, worn by mechanicians
on big motor cars—commonly, sack style, with ample pockets,
reinforcements, etc.

=Medicin ball=—something like a heavy football but with no medicin in
it.

=Medium bound=—same as half-and-half b. Compare Narrow b. and Flat b.

=Meeter=—same as meeting folder.

=Meeting folder=—trade term for folded shirt collars that come close
together or meet at the fold when buttoned. Compare Spaced front.

=Melange=—(1) a French word signifying mixture; (2) woolen fabrics of
mixt yarns.

=Melton=—a stout, compact woolen cloth, thoroly fulled and finisht with
a close, even nap without luster; very similar but superior to kersey
(qv).

=Men’s outfitter=—a name commonly assumed, and not improperly, by
retailers who combine haberdashery, and frequently hats and shoes, with
the clothing business.

=Mending tissue=—same as Rubber t.

=Mercer=—a dealer in cloths or silks.

=Mercerized=—a term applied to cotton fabrics of which the yarn is
chemically treated and the fabric finisht by a combined
chemical-mechanical process described below; also applied to woolen
fabrics containing an admixture of mercerized cotton. See Manipulated
and Cotton cheat.

=Mercerizing=—the process of subjecting cotton yarns or cloth to the
action of caustic soda and other chemicals, under stretching tension,
with various subsequent finishing operations, resulting in threads or
fabrics softer, silkier and stronger than before treatment; named from
John Mercer, an English calico printer, the original discoverer but not
the perfecter of the process.

=Merchant=—one who buys and sells commercial commodities; specifically,
a retailer.

=Merchant tailor=—a clothier who combines tailoring with readymade.
Compare Custom t.

=Merino=—(1) a thin woolen fabric made of the fine wool of the m. sheep,
generally used for women’s dress wear; (2) also a knitted underwear
fabric containing more or less cotton intermixt; (3) hosiery and
underwear of wool-and-cotton.

=Merino=—the wool of a variety of sheep raised principally for their
wool, which is of fine quality, long staple and of unequaled felting
properties. See Wool.

=Merveilleux=—a fine, diagonal-twilled silk fabric with a satiny face,
largely used for linings.

=Mess dress=—(=navy=) a uniform to be worn on ordinary social occasions
in the evening, to which officers are invited in their official
capacity, and where hot weather or other circumstances make it
appropriate, also at dinner on board vessels other than those of the
fourth rate, by officers for whom the mess jacket is prescribed, when
the uniform of the day has been white, or, at discretion of commanding
officer, instead of “evening dress B”. Consists of, for all commissioned
officers (except chief boatswains, chief gunners, chief carpenters and
chief sailmakers) and for midshipmen: mess jacket, white evening dress
waistcoat, undress trousers (white or full dress trousers, may be
prescribed), shoulder marks, white cap, black tie.

=Mess dress=—(=marine corps=) worn by all officers on mess occasions,
and may be worn on social occasions to which officers are invited in
their official capacity, or when evening dress B. is prescribed for
officers of the navy. Consists of mess jacket (blue), evening dress
trousers and waistcoat, shoulder knots, white standing collar, black
silk tie, full dress cap, black shoes (white waistcoat if prescribed);
in summer, white mess jacket, white or evening dress trousers, white
waistcoat, blue or white undress cap, black or white shoes; otherwise
the same.

=Mess jacket=—(=army=) a short j. of dark blue cloth, cut like the body
of an evening dress coat, descending to the hips, slightly curved to a
point behind and in front, 3 regulation buttons, sleeves ornamented same
as full dress coat, with other decorations as adopted by the corps to
which the wearers belong, and as prescribed by regulation.

=Mess jacket=—(=navy=) a short coat of white linen duck or similar
material, cut similar to body of evening dress coat but descending only
to the hips and slightly roached over the hips with a peak behind; 2
buttons on each side below the lapels and worn with two buttons
connected by a ring from the first buttonhole; appropriate shoulder
marks according to regulations. For chaplains: same with white buttons.

=Mess jacket=—(=marine corps=) a round j. of dark blue cloth lined with
scarlet silk to edges, in length reaching to point of the hips at sides
and curving to points in front and rear, 16 small marine corps buttons
on right side, with buttonholes to match on left side, standing collar,
and with trimmings for rank as per regulations; to be worn unbuttoned.
Also a white j. of similar style, for wear, as prescribed. Worn by major
general commandant and all other officers.

=Mess uniform=—(=army=) officers of staff corps and departments, of
artillery, cavalry and infantry are authorized to adopt a mess jacket
distinctiv of their corps, department or regiment, for social evening
occasions; with it are worn a waistcoat of the color of the coat (or
white) and full dress trousers, altho in warm weather or in the tropics,
white trousers may be worn; black shoes.

=Messenger’s suit=—usually a four-button, double-breasted sack s., of
plain cloth, with regular peakt lapel collar, with or without braid
trimming, trousers to match. Or, military blouse with three diverging
rows of buttons closing with hooks and eyes.

=Metric system=—better than ours: look it up.

=Mexican fiber=—Istle (qv).

=Mi-fine=—half f. See Fine.

=Middlesex=—general term for standard uniform cloths made by the
Middlesex Co., Lowell, Mass.

=Middling=—see Cotton classification.

=Middling fair=—see Cotton classification.

=Middy suit=—a s. for small boys, consisting of a sailor blouse and long
trousers with wide mouths. Compare Sailor s.

=Midshipman’s uniform=—see Special full dress, Full dress, Dress,
Service dress, Evening dress, Mess dress, Undress. Also variants.

=Milan=—a fine, pliable white straw for hats.

=Milan braid=—a variety of flat mohair braid used for trimming and
binding.

=Military=—term for garments affecting military uniforms in fit or
detail of finish; also military garments per se.

=Military back=—close-fitting; shaped.

=Military braid=—a name sometimes given to hercules b. and soutache b.

=Military brushes=—twin hair b. of oval shape, without handle, used two
at a time.

=Military cloths=—general term for woolen fabrics intended for uniform
purposes, such as kersey.

=Military coat=—trade name for short sack c. of 1899, having a
close-fitting back.

=Military collar=—a plain, straight standing coat c. without turn over,
of prescribed hights, fastening in front with hooks and eyes.

=Military hair-brushes=—see M. brushes.

=Military overcoat=—see Army o.

=Military uniforms=—see Army u.

=Mill=—(1) a place where fabrics are woven; (2) an occasion where two
gentlemen endeavor to smash the padding out of a peculiar sort of gloves
over each other’s face and solar plexus.

=Mill ends=—trade term referring to short lengths, remnants, seconds,
damaged pieces, etc., that accumulate in mills and are usually sold at a
nominal price.

=Mill finish=—a beautiful appearance given to cloths, fabrics, etc.,
which provokes the question, “How will it look after it is sponged or
laundered”?

=Mill-gang=—that part of a loom-warp made by a rising and falling course
of the threads around old-style warping-mills.

=Mill wrinkles=—see Cockling.

=Milliner=—a shopkeeper to whom much of hubby’s money goes.

=Milling=—the process of fulling or thickening cloth. See an
encyclopedia.

=Millwright frock=—something worn about 1825, but not identified.

=Miner’s coat=—a rubber overcoat of generous size, having reinforced
sleeves, shoulders, etc., and usually elastic inside sleeves or dust
shields.

=Minister’s=—affectionate abbreviation for standard fashion plates
publisht in London by a firm of that name, and subscribed for over here
for the purpose of awing customers into a higher respect for their
tailors.

=Mink=—an amphibious musteline carnivore of the genus Putorious, the
pelt of which is an important article of fur garment manufacture.

=Mirror=—glass with one side so backt or coated as to form a nearly
perfect reflecting surface.

=Misericorde=—a “dagger of mercy” carried by European soldiery of 15th
century for the final dispatch of fallen foes.

=Misfit=—the term is a terror to tailors.

=Misfit shop=—a merchandising lie.

=Mitchell’s=—familiar term for standard American fashion plates publisht
by a concern of that name in New York city, and which, like all other
fashion plates, make a most impressiv show.

=Miter=—a headdress worn in solemn services by bishops and certain
abbots; a tall, tongue-shape cap, terminating in a two-fold point, the
whole richly ornamented. (=Mitre.=)

=Mitten=—an unwelcome gift from a woman.

=Mittens=—a covering or protection for the hands, of leather or knitted
wool, the thumb only being fashioned, the rest of the fingers covered by
a single sack or the larger part of the mitten. (Almost always used
plural).

=Mixing picker=—a machine for disentangling wool fibers and thoroly
mixing them before carding.

=Mixing willey=—same as M. picker.

=Mixture=—trade term for fabrics woven of dyed yarns, the warp and weft
being of different shades, or either or both of twisted yarns of
different colors; any melange weave or effect.

=Moccasin=—a foot covering or shoe, without built-up heels, of buckskin
or other soft leather, worn by American Indians, hunters, and others.

=Moccasin shoe=—a light, pliable shoe of stout leather, without heel,
somewhat resembling a m.

=Mocha=—general term for sheep or goatskin glove leather, of soft,
velvety appearance and very durable quality.

=Moche=—a package of spun silk as received in import.

=Mock gold=—an alloy of copper, zinc and platinum.

=Mock seam=—(glove term) a row or rows of stitching in imitation of a s.

=Mock velvet=—see Mockado.

=Mock welt=—in shoemaking, an imitation of the Goodyear process of sole
sewing. See Welt sole, Goodyear welt, McKay sewed, etc.

=Mockado=—a sort of velvet with a very deep pile, the better grades
being of silk, the cheaper of wool, used in 16th and 17th centuries.
Also called Mock velvet.

=Mode=—the prevailing fashion or custom.

=Mode=—a sort of tan shade; ecru.

=Modelers=—workmen who try garments on human models.

=Models=—persons employed by some clothing manufacturers and upon whom
the various garments are fitted for approval; representing types of the
section where the garments are to be marketed.

=Mohair=—(1) the fine, silky hair of the Angora goat; (2) a glistening,
light-weight, plain-woven fabric of cotton warp and filling of mohair,
enormously durable, used for summer coats, linings, etc.; also twill
woven. See Angora.

=Mohair braid=—a woven b. of mohair, coarser than silk b. of various
widths, used principally for military, society and livery uniforms,
known variously, according to weave, as hercules b., soutache b., etc.

=Mohair button=—a b. made on a mold covered with braided mohair threads,
worn on dress coats, overcoats, waistcoats, etc.

=Mohair corsican=—a light-weight fabric for summer suitings, woven of
Australian wool and fine mohair carded together, with a finish lacking
the usual sheen or luster of mohair, and warranted by the makers not to
cockle, wrinkle or be affected by damp weather. (Proprietary name).

=Mohair serge=—a stout, twill woven lining material of cotton warp and
m. weft.

=Moire=—(1) a wavy or watered effect produced on silks and other fabrics
by means of passage thru suitably engraved rollers with brushlike
attachments for disturbing and shifting the warp threads, the process
embracing dampening, great pressure and ironing; (2) general name for
silk (and other fabrics) so treated; also called Watered (silk).

=Moire antique=—an all-over m. effect. See Moire.

=Moire francaise=—a striped or banded m. effect. See Moire.

=Molded counter=—in shoemaking, a c. made of shoddy or imitation
leather.

=Moleskin=—a heavy, stout, flexible, close twilled cotton cloth, piece
dyed and finisht with a scant nap on the back, used for hunting and
sporting clothes; usually tan or slate-colored. An imitation thereof,
known by the same name, but lighter, and with a printed surface, is used
for laborer’s trousers, etc.

=Moleskins=—colloquial for football clothes.

=Mollie=—reverse of tomboy.

=Mollycoddle=—sissified males, usually distinguishable by the
omnipresent cigaret, also by inflammable neckwear and protesting clothes
generally, and characterised by incurable lassitude, complicated by
chronic ogling of pretty girls.

=Momie=—general term for fabrics characterised by rough, uneven weave
produced by the threads crossing at irregular intervals or by warp and
weft threads of various sizes. (Fr mummy).

=Money-belt=—a device for containing money, worn around the waist under
the clothes, commonly of oiled silk or chamois leather—usually excess
luggage.

=Monk bag=—a small purse which sailors wear strung around the neck,
containing their money and other valuables.

=Monkey-jacket=—a short j. cut in sack form, fitting close to the waist
and flaring out at the bottom. Worn by sailors in cold weather.

=Monmouth cap=—a c. worn about 1600, largely by sailors.

=Monocle=—an eye-glass for one eye; English, y’ know.

=Montagnac=—a variety of chinchilla overcoating (qv), having a surface
composed of small loops, part of which are cut and brusht into a flowing
nap producing, with the uncut part, a rough, shaggy effect. Name from
Montagnac Fils, Sedan, France, the original weavers.

=Montero cap=—a horseman’s knitted or cloth c. with a simple round crown
and a flap around the back and sides that could be worn down for
protection; worn from 1600 until late in 1800. Also called Mountier c.

=Mooding=—cutlery term for the rough shapening of blades at the first
heat.

=Mopusses=—nautical slang for money in general.

=Mordant=—dyeing term for any metallic salt used as a connecting bond
between dye and fabric.

=Morice-dancing dress=—a curious garment of fawn-colored silk, made in
the form of a tunic, with slasht sleeves and trappings of red and green
satin, worn by members of the ancient guild of Glovers at their
entertainments, in which dance they had a remarkable proficiency.
Accompanying the garment were 252 small circular bells, arranged in 21
sets of 12 bells each, upon strips of leather, and fastened on various
parts of the dancer’s body, such sets of bells being perfectly attuned
in regular musical intervals.

=Morion=—a pointed oval iron helmet with a curved rim, bent down over
the ears, worn by French arquebusiers of the 16th century.

=Morning coat=—a single-breasted cutaway frock c., properly of black or
quiet patterned goods, with or without hip pockets.

=Morning livery=—for house footmen, usually plain black tuxedo suit; for
club and hotel waiters, black, blue or green tuxedo coat and trousers,
with fancy vest.

=Morse=—a clasp used to fasten the cope (qv).

=Mortarboard=—a college cap of soft, black material, made to fit the
head like a skull cap, surmounted by a square of cardboard or stiffened
canvas (about 12 × 12 inches), also covered with black cloth and with a
loose silk tassel about 10 inches long attacht to a button placed where
the diagonals of the square would intersect.

=Morts=—in the old Irish glove trade, a name given to skins of unborn
calves, taken from cows that had died. Compare Slinks.

=Moschettos=—garments very similar to pantaloons (qv) continued to the
small of the leg, with a slight spring when the top of the shoe is
reacht, having an opening with a gaiter tongue and closing with buttons,
forming a combination of pantaloons and gaiters; worn early in last
century.

=Moscow=—an overcoating cloth with a heavy nap, similar to Shetland
(qv).

=Mosey=—an under-jacket, usually made of baize or flannel, and worn
instead of an undershirt but over the shirt in cold weather, and as an
outside garment in moderate or warm weather; also called a “wammus”
(qv).

=Mosquito netting=—a square mesh, open-woven, cotton fabric, employed
for bed canopies, tent-opening covers, helmet aprons, etc.

=Moth balls=—aromatic substances used to disguise the odor of goods that
have been carried over from one season to another.

=Mother of pearl=—see Nacre.

=Moths=—pests that make business for the clothier or tailor, or
disaster, according to where they work.

=Motley=—“the only wear” for fools.

=Motor shawl=—a light, woolen wrap or neckpiece for motoring and outdoor
use generally.

=Motorman’s uniform=—usually same as conductor’s u., which see.

=Mouchoir=—handkerchief.

=Moule cloth=—a soft, velvety overcoating of good thickness but of
comparativly light-weight, tho very warm.

=Mountaineer’s boot=—same as hunting b., with an extra outside counter
of sole leather protecting the heel.

=Mountaineer’s coat=—a bifurcated overcoat, usually of rubber or other
waterproof material, buttoning around each leg and closing snugly around
neck and wrists by means of straps or tabs.

=Mountier cap=—see Montero-c.

=Mourning=—symptoms of real or simulated grief.

=Mourning badge=—(=navy=) for officers a crepe band about 3 inches wide
and about 20 inches long, knotted upon the sword hilt, and a crepe band
3 inches wide worn on the left arm above the elbow; (=army=) a knot of
black crepe worn on the saber hilt for a period not exceeding 30 days.

=Mourning band=—a broad b. or brassard of black crepe fastened on the
left arm of a coat, as a makeshift symbol of customary grief. Originally
worn on English army officers’ caps, which, being too low to display
both b. and decorations or insignia, enforced the dropping to the
sleeve; next adopted by coachmen and footmen as recognition of death in
the master’s family; afterward by costermongers because of its cheapness
(and showiness), the cost of new black clothes being a grave
consideration. Finally pickt up by ignorant Americans because of a
fancied “smartness”—like the nouveau riche who invents a coat of arms,
bearing a bend sinister.

=Mourning colors=—black thruout Europe and America, with a tendency to
purple in combination; yellow, Egypt and Burmah; brown, Persia, Ethiopia
and Abyssinia; white, China; blue, China; violet, Turkey.

=Mourning crepe=—see Crepe.

=Mourning handkerchief=—black bordered.

=Mourning jewelry=—usually lockets made of a lock of the hair of the
dear departed, sometimes encircling a portrait or miniature, emblematic
of g-r-i-e-f!

=Mourning periods=—see Appendix.

=Mourning ring=—a finger r. worn in memory of a dead person, who may
have bequeathed it or the money to purchase it; once upon a time en
regle at a funeral and awhile after; often enameled black and bearing
lugubrious moral mottos.

=Moustache curler=—see Curling iron.

=Moustache paste=—a sort of pomade used by actors, in making up, for the
purpose of hiding or flattening their own upper-lip adornments.

=Moustache trainer=—a device for giving a fierce, amiable, freakish,
languid, important or asinine appearance to one’s labial adornment.

=Muckender=—colonial for handkerchief.

=Mozetta=—a short cape covering the shoulders, a part of the state dress
of bishops when not pontificating, worn with the rochet.

=Mud scows=—slang for overshoes.

=Muff=—a cylindrical fur pillow or cushion into which the hands are
thrust to keep them warm, nowadays carried only by women, but once upon
a time men, too, wore them.

=Muffetees=—colonial for wristlets.

=Muffler=—a piece of silk, wool or other material, usually square, used
for warmth and protection of the throat in cold weather.

=Muffler=—a name once given to boxing gloves.

=Mufflet=—proprietary name for a knitted throat band, buttoning in the
back, with a small apron in front covering the coat opening.

=Mufti=—(1) citizen’s dress worn by military or naval officers off duty;
(2) ordinary dress as distinguisht from full dress or dress for state
occasions.

=Mule=—a slipper without heel or heel-counter; a slip-on.

=Mule=—a spinning machine delivering rovings from drawing-rolls to
spindles on a carriage that recedes from the rolls as the threads are
twisted and returns to them as the thread is wound, performing the
operations of drawing, stretching and twisting simultaneously.

=Muleskin=—a leather of obvious derivation used for heavy working gloves
and mittens.

=Mullet=—the rowel of a spur.

=Mungo=—the waste produced in a woolen mill from hardspun or felted
cloth, and which is used in connection with wool, cotton or better
grades of waste in the manufacture of backing yarns or cheap cloth.
Compare Shoddy and Garnetting.

=Murry=—reddish purple; in olden time “a favorit color for the garments
of respectable elderly gentlemen”.

=Mushy=—clerks’ term for loosely rolled bolts of cloth.

=Musician’s uniform=—(=navy=) see Full dress u., Dress u., White u.,
Service u., Fatigue u. Also variants.

=Musk=—a perfume distilled from a secretion found in a sac in the
stomach of the m. deer and other animals; the strongest and most durable
of all perfumes, almost ineradicable when used in the pure state, and
for which negroes have an extraordinary fondness. Musk forms the basis
of many compounded scents.

=Muskrat=—a common marsh animal yielding a valuable fur, used as an
imitation of sealskin and other costly furs; also used by hat
manufacturers.

=Muslin=—a light, commonly plain-woven cotton cloth of various classes
and names, as bleacht, unbleacht, twilled, cambric, longcloth, shirting,
sheeting, silesia, and a number of others; used for shirts, night robes,
etc., and in tailoring as linings and interlinings.

=Mutton chops=—side whiskers shaped like mutton chops, moderately
trimmed.


                                   N

=Nacre=—(1) mother of pearl; (2) an iridescent effect in silk weaving.

=Nail=—2¼ inches.

=Nail=—an emergency fastening when a suspender button gives way.

=Nail clipper=—a mechanical device for putting saw edges on one’s
fingernails.

=Nail file=—an instrument of toilet torture.

=Nail heads=—name for small, rounded, covered buttons used decorativly.

=Nainsook=—a stout, glossy muslin, striped, barred or plain.

=Naked=—in need of clothes (?).

=Name tag=—a leather or metal adjunct to traveling luggage, carrying
name and address of the owner for the information of confidence men.

=Name web=—a strip of cotton webbing with name of manufacturer or dealer
woven therein, as shoe pulls, etc.

=Nankeen=—properly a peculiar fabric of a pale, dull orange color, woven
out of the fibrous tissue which lies between the epidermis and the
sapwood of a tree or shrub which grows in the East Indies and especially
in China. The name is derived from the imperial city of Nankin or from
the tree or shrub which yields the tissue. An imitation is made out of
cotton and colored with aleutta. The genuine nankeen is never more than
18 or 20 inches wide, and is used mostly for light summer trousers,
riding breeches, and children’s clothing.

=Nap=—the projecting and inclined fibers of warp and filling thread on
the surface of flannel, silk-hat material and various cloths, forming a
soft surface, lying smoothly in one direction, particularly if of
uniform length or texture, but feeling rough or bristly if rubbed the
wrong way or against the nap.

=Napa=—light, tough, goatskin glove leather.

=Nape=—the starting point from which the length and the
shoulder-measures are taken for a coat. A vertebral protuberance located
in the back central part of the neck at its junction with the thorax or
trunk.

=Naphtha=—an inflammable petroleum distillate used as a cleansing agent.

=Napier cloth=—a once popular, double-face c. for cloaks and wraps, one
side wool, the other of hair.

=Napoleon leg=—a boot-l. with a “wave” top, high in front, receding
sides and low back.

=Napping machine=—an apparatus for producing a nap on cloth, etc.,
particularly the modern form having fine steel wires rotating on
rollers, to take the place of teasels, thus distinguisht from the older
gigging machine.

=Nappy=—having a nap; shaggy.

=Napt=—having a nap, of course. (=Napped.=)

=Narrow=—trade term for goods not up to stated width. Compare N. goods.

=Narrow-bound=—in tailoring, an edge finish obtained by the use of a
narrow braid applied half-and-half. Compare Medium-b. and Broad-b.

=Narrow falls=—trade name for front fall trousers in which the front
flap or fall begins at about the center of each leg and is made with a
smaller fall-bearer than is required in broadfalls (qv). Also called
Split f.

=Narrow goods=—trade term for fabrics less than 29 inches wide; wider
cloths called broad.

=Nasal filter=—a device having a screen or double screens of fine gauze
or bolting cloth intended for wear when motoring, etc., to exclude dust.

=Natte=—textil term meaning matted or basket-weave, n. fabrics usually
having small checks, in one or more colors, with the effect of being
braided.

=Natural=—trade term for undyed furs.

=Natural shoulders=—not extravagantly padded artificially.

=Nature’s garb=—proscribed.

=Navajo blanket=—a stout, heavy woolen b. primitivly woven by the Navajo
Indians of Arizona and New Mexico, of fantastic color combinations and
so closely woven and compacted that the texture is absolutely
waterproof.

=Naval lace=—a variety of gold braid used for trimming uniforms.

=Naval officer’s cloak=—of dark blue cloth, cut three-quarters of a
circle, of a length reaching to the tips of the fingers, with a rolling
collar and with a frog on the breast.

=Naval officer’s mackintosh=—of black material reaching to 9 or 12
inches of the ground, having a rolling collar, no sleeves, and a cape
reaching to the ends of the fingers; epaulets or shoulder knots as per
regulation.

=Naval overcoat=—for officers: a long double-breasted ulster of dark
blue cloth, buttoning to the neck with deep rolling ulster collar, 7
plain flat black buttons on each front, a deep vertical pocket in each
breast, a belt extending from each side seam, buttoning across the back
(which is cut quite full), a deep vent in the back and another over the
left hip for the sword; a detachable hood, buttoning around the neck,
for cold weather wear; shoulder and sleeve marks as prescribed by
regulations; for chief petty officers, except bandmaster: a
double-breasted ulster of dark blue cloth, reaching to the knees, lined
with dark blue flannel, buttoning to the neck with deep, rolling collar,
5 large black buttons on each side, 2 vertical breast pockets and 2
lower horizontal pockets with flaps; for all other enlisted men, except
bandsmen: the same, but of a length reaching to the tips of the fingers;
for bandsmen: of similar model, but of sky-blue kersey, reaching to 6 or
8 inches below the knee, with a 16 in. back (center) vent, 2 rows of 7
gilt buttons, rolling collar, to which a circular cape, lined with
scarlet flannel, is attacht on specified occasions.

=Naval overshirt=—a shirt worn by all enlisted men, except chief petty
officers, officers’ stewards, officers’ cooks and bandsmen; made of dark
blue flannel, loose in the body, gathered at the waist, having a collar
9 to 10 inches deep and 14 to 18 inches wide beginning at the opening in
the neck (which is 7 inches deep), full sleeves terminating in fitting
wristcuffs, a small pocket in the left breast; collar and cuffs trimmed
with white tape and with sleeve insignia all as prescribed for the
several ratings.

=Naval trousers=—for all enlisted men, excepting chief petty officers
and bandsmen: (1) of dark blue cloth fitting snugly over the hip and
down the thigh to 2 inches above the knee, from which point downward cut
bell shaped and full enough to be pulled up over the thigh; one seam on
each leg on the inside; made with a laced back and front falls; 2
pockets in waistband above the flap, no hip pocket; (2) of bleacht
cotton drill for dress and unbleacht for undress, made with a fly front
and top pockets, otherwise as described for blue trousers.

=Naval uniforms=—for officers, are specially designated (1) special full
dress, (2) full dress, (3) dress, (4) undress A, (5) undress B, (6)
service dress, (7) evening dress A, (8) evening dress B, (9) mess dress,
(10) uniform A, (11) uniform B, (12) uniform C; for enlisted men, are
designated (1) blue dress, (2) blue undress, (3) white dress, (4) white
undress, (5) blue working dress, (6) white working dress, all of which
see.

=Navy twills=—a heavy all-wool shirting flannel, twill woven, usually
dyed navy-blue.

=Near edge=—in drafting, that edge of the pattern nearest the designer.
(Tailoring term.)

=Near-seal=—not very near at that.

=Near-silk=—a mercerized cotton lining fabric having a slight glaze and
high luster, with or without a twill or artificially imparted moire.

=Neat=—tasteful, not tawdry, clean.

=Neat=—see Wool.

=Neats-foot oil=—an o. obtained from the feet of cattle and esteemed
good for keeping shoes in condition.

=Neck=—the stem made by the thread when sewing on buttons; as “the neck
is too short” when too tight, or “the neck is too long” when too loose
or drooping. (Tailoring term.)

=Neck hole=—tailoring term, applied to garments ready for try-on,
meaning the opening to which the collar is not yet sewed on.

=Neck lock=—see Wig.

=Neck point=—the socket bone; a term in tailor’s measurements,
indicating where the collar is to be adjusted to the garment.

=Neck stock=—see Stock.

=Neckband=—that part of a shirt which by going often to the laundry
acquires a hardness, serration and temper prejudicial to the comfort,
peace and happiness of the wearer.

=Neckcloth=—a cravat, scarf or other neckdressing.

=Neckerchief=—a square or oblong piece of silk, linen or cotton, of
suitable pattern, worn as a neckcovering, principally with outing
attire.

=Necktie=—correctly, a long, narrow tie fastened in a bow in front.

=Necktie silks=—see Cravating.

=Necktie sociable=—a vigilance committee’s soiree.

=Neckwear=—trade term for neckdressings of all sorts, particularly
cravats, stocks, ties, etc.

=Needle=—a small, slender pointed steel instrument with an eye for
carrying thread thru fabrics in sewing; of various kinds, known among
tailors as silk-n., thread-n., button-n., basting-n., etc., and these
again are known as sharps, blunts, betweens, etc.

=Needle-board=—a perforated board used to guide the needles in a
Jacquard loom.

=Needle toe=—an extremely sharp pointed once fashionable (?) in shoes.

=Needleman=—a man who sews; a tailor, furrier, etc.

=Neglige=—easy and informal dress.

=Neglige shirt=—a s. with plain or plaited front, but not with a
built-up bosom; usually of fancy materials and most worn in the summer
time.

=Negro cloth=—a cheap, coarse homespun cloth (of tow?), of colonial
days, worn by farm laborers.

=Netherstocks=—stockings.

=Nettle-cloth=—a varnisht thick cotton cloth used for belts, cap visors,
etc., as a substitute for leather.

=Nettle fiber=—see Ramie.

=New-fangled=—anything which people may not yet be used to.

=New mown hay=—a perfume imaginativly supposed to resemble the odor of
fresh cut hay.

=New York surtout=—a fashionable frock overcoat of 1851, having very
short skirts cut straight off (horizontally) and with a prodigious
collar rolling down to the waistline, liberally trimmed with wide fancy
braid.

=Newmarket=—general term for the long, double-breasted frock overcoat
(from Newmarket, Eng., a town celebrated for its racing meets),
originally worn when driving or riding; a surtout.

=N. G.=—slang for “no good”.

=Nid d’abeille=—bee hive effects in weaving.

=Nifty=—excellence of style and appearance; up to the mark.

=Niggerhead=—a cloth with rough knotted or curly surface, resembling
boucle and Astrakhan. See also Petersham.

=Night cap=—a sort of bonnet, of light material, for sleeping in—also
something to help you sleep without one.

=Night drawers=—sleeping garments, made usually with legs and feet,
commonly worn by children.

=Night gown=—in colonial days an undress garment worn at home, but not
for sleeping; often quite elaborate; a dressing g. or jacket; sometimes
worn away from home, as at the office.

=Night rail=—name given in colonial times to what is our present-day
night robe.

=Night robe=—see N. shirt.

=Night shirt=—a long, loose gown for sleeping purposes.

=Night slip=—an infant’s night dress.

=Night stick=—a hardwood club used by policemen in riot work, but more
noticeably for rapping on the corner pavement at night to keep the
neighborhood from too profound slumber.

=Nightie=—sleeping wear.

=Nightingale=—a peculiar, open-sleeved bed jacket, named after the
famous nurse of the Crimean war.

=Nimbus=—the disk or halo which “the old man” thinks encircles his head
refulgently.

=Nitch=—see Notch.

=No collar=—self-explanatory; tailoring term used mostly in connection
with waistcoat.

=No dress=—no allowance to be made; small. See Dress.

=Noils=—knots and short bits of wool taken from the long staple in
combing; waste silk.

=Noose=—a sort of necktie of no great popularity.

=Norfolk jacket=—a sack coat or j., straight front and single-breasted,
with or without a yoke, having box plaits down the fronts and back and a
belt of same material; the adjustment and style of yoke, plaits,
pockets, etc., varies with season, taste of wearer and maker; most worn
for hunting and for outdoor sports.

=Normal=—hosiery and underwear term for natural undyed wool and garments
thereof.

=Normal=—(clothing term.) See Regular.

=Norwegian sock=—a heavy knit wool stocking similar to golf hose; used
by hunters, lumbermen, explorers, et al.

=Nose guard=—a solid rubber face disfigurer that must be chewed.
(Football.)

=Nose mask=—same as N. guard.

=Nose putty=—an article of theatrical makeup.

=Nosegay=—a small bunch of fragrant flowers; broadly, a boutonniere.

=Not balanced=—said of a coat that does not hang or drape well; out of
balance; shifted.

=Not ready=—a phrase that has lost tailors more customers than
readymaders ever gained otherwise.

=Notch=—in garment making, a V or nick cut into the edge of the cut
cloth, showing where it is to be joined to another piece with a
corresponding notch.

=Notch=—(tailoring term.) See Step; also see below.

=Notcht collar=—the typical c. of all single-breasted sack coats and
waistcoats. In body coats and overcoats the collar is separate from the
lapel to which it is joined in such a manner as to leave a notch or
“step”; in waistcoats a notcht c. is usually of one piece on each side
without seam, but with a V notch cut therein. (Notched c.)

=Nouveau riche=—one who has recently become rich and who proceeds to
show off, first of all by adopting flashier and costlier clothes than
could previously be afforded.

=Novelties=—the transient styles of a season; fancies, not staple; the
basis of all reduction sales or clearing sales.

=Nuage=—French for clouded effects (in weaving).

=Nullifier=—a name sometimes given to a sort of slipper better known as
Romeo (qv).

=Nun’s cloth=—see below.

=Nun’s veiling=—a thin, semi-transparent, plain-woven, woolen fabric,
used for mourning bands, office coats, etc.; a complete suit for a man
would average say 32 ounces in weight.

=Nursery cloth=—general name for thick, heavy cotton cloth or
blanketing, used singly or two-ply in a desperate effort to save bedding
from our infant ravages; most commonly a sort of very coarse, heavy,
double-faced Canton flannel, or two sheets of muslin slightly wadded and
quilted, tho there are several other varieties.

=Nutria=—the fur of the Brazilian otter, largely used in hat manufacture
and for fur garments.


                                   O

=Oak tanned=—term for leather tanned with oak bark.

=Ocean pearl=—trade term distinguishing oyster p. (and articles thereof)
from fresh water or mussel and clam shell p. from inland waters.

=Odd Fellow’s coat=—same as Masonic Sir Knight’s c., but with 9 buttons
instead of 11.

=Off color=—trade term for goods not comparing with the standard of
color by which bought. Compare Cloudy and Shaded.

=Office=—where the pay envelope comes from; otherwise useless to the
average employe.

=Office coat=—usually an alpaca sack c., unlined, broadly, any old c.
not fit to be seen on the street, but good enough to wipe pens on.

=Office towel=—an indurated, inelastic piece of textil fabric of dark
color, used for toilet purposes.

=Officer’s facings=—(=army=) color for general officers, staff and
department officers, dark blue; for officers of engineers, scarlet piped
with white; signal corps, orange piped with white; ordnance, black piped
with scarlet; medical corps, maroon; quartermaster’s department, buff;
cavalry, yellow; artillery, scarlet; infantry, light blue.

=Oil-boiled=—trade term for colors so treated as to ensure permanence.

=Oil frock=—a waterproof slicker-coat worn by miners, fishermen, etc.

=Oil grain=—same as stuft leather.

=Oil test=—(linen vs. cotton); a sample of cloth is boiled in water or
alkali solution to remove the finishing matter, then laid on a glass
plate and saturated with a heavy oil. A smaller glass plate is then
placed over the sample to protect it from the air. After removing the
surplus oil from the edges, the sample is examined with the light
falling on it, and then with the light passing thru it. The linen fiber,
owing to its thick cells with their greater resistance to light, appears
transparent and resembles a slop of grease on paper. When the light
passes thru it, it appears bright; and when the light falls upon it, it
is dark. The reverse is the case with cotton. The air in the interior of
the cotton fiber, as well as between the fibers themselves, is not
displaced by the oil, and makes the cotton appear opaque; consequently
when the light falls on the fiber it is bright, and when the light
passes thru it it is dark.

=Oilcloth=—a painted and varnisht cotton fabric, largely employed, among
other uses, for cap visors, belt linings, etc.

=Oiled silk=—a thin, plain-woven silk fabric impregnated with boiled oil
and dried, becoming translucent and waterproof, used for perspiration
guards, money belts, etc.

=Oilers=—vernacular for oilskins (qv).

=Oilskin=—a heavy, cotton cloth impregnated with oil and gum to render
it waterproof; used for sailor’s coats, slickers, etc.; the name is also
applied to such garments.

=Oilskins=—“slickers” (qv). Also see above.

=O. K.=—all right; all correct. The most popular idea of the derivation
is that told of General Jackson, better known in American history as Old
Hickory, who was not much at home in the art of spelling, and that he
employed the letters O. K. as an endorsement of applications for office
and other papers, intending them to stand for “all (orl) correct
(korrect)”.

=Ol clo’s man=—a stoop-shouldered individual in a long frock coat, low
billycock hat, wearing luxuriant whiskers and unclean fingernails.

=Old beau=—a fastidious old fellow of the “old school”, fond of women’s
society.

=Old fashioned=—not of today.

=Old gold=—a dull, brassy, yellow color.

=Old man=—the head of the house who raises or reduces salaries, but who
otherwise is not generally reckoned as having any special value to the
business.

=Old-man’s frock=—a one-button cutaway f. coat, cut rather full in
front.

=Old silver=—s. made to appear old by chemical treatment.

=Old thirds=—an obsolete English system of tailor’s measurements,
invented by a German tailor in the early part of the 19th century.

=Olive=—a barrel-shaped fastening device used in connection with loops;
a portion of a frog (qv); usually mohair or silk covered; worn
principally on uniform overcoats.

=Olivauto cloth=—proprietary name for a clear-finisht worsted, 14 oz.
cloth, made especially with reference to the needs of motorists; is dust
proof and waterproof and of a brownish olive-drab shade.

=Ombre=—weaving term for blended stripes, shading off or into one
another, effected by adjustment of warp and filling threads; usually
applied to silks.

=Omophorion=—a sort of broad pallium (qv) worn by the Greek and Russian
ministry.

=On one’s uppers=—shabby genteel.

=Once-over=—see Ascot, Puff, Waterfall, etc.; a method of tying same.

=One-button cutaway=—see Fat man’s frock.

=One-button sack=—see Fat man’s s.

=One-way plait=—prest flat from either side of the stitching; the
reverse of box p.

=Ongrowing collar=—tailors’ term for waistcoat collars that are
continued around the neck like coat collars instead of being sewed down
at the shoulder and continuing merely as a band around the back of the
neck. O. collars, therefore, are formed of the facing and forepart and
top and undercollar parts and may have any kind of peakt or notcht lapel
or rever, but are seldom made with the no-seam notch characteristic of
ordinary single-breasted waistcoat collars.

=O O=—“own order”; in tailoring, a memorandum made by cutters who
dislike a customer’s insistence upon certain details.

=Ooze=—suede leather.

=Open-face vest=—vernacular for evening dress waistcoat.

=Open fly=—not closed or boxt. See Fly.

=Open front=—a term usually applied to shirt bosoms made in two parts
and joined by buttons or studs.

=Open front fold=—trade term for folded shirt collars where the standing
band is cut away in V shape and the fold rather more so.

=Open lap seam=—same as Open welt s.

=Open shop=—the opposit of closed s. (qv); a s., factory or other
establishment where workmen may be employed regardless of union or other
affiliations.

=Open trousers=—tailors’ term for t. made for customers who stand with
their legs spread apart or open, the inseam being longer than is
required for closed t., which see.

=Open welt seam=—in tailoring, a s. resembling a plait. The two parts of
the material are first sewed regularly, after which one part, which has
been cut wider for the purpose, is basted over to the required size of
the welt and sewed at the place of the first seam. Properly used as a
finish for the side seams of trousers. See Welt s.

=Open-work=—trade term for drop stitch ribs or lace work designs in
hosiery, etc.

=Opening=—tailoring term for the amount of space at throat not covered
by a coat or vest, allowing display of (more or less) clean linen,
betraying one’s taste in neckwear and jewelry, and, according to area,
inviting bronchitis or bellyache. Compare Gorge.

=Opening=—the first step in the process of carding cotton; separating
the matted fibers and removing foreign objects.

=Opening machine=—see Willowing m.

=Opera cloak=—a cape-like overgarment extending to the knees, having a
narrow standing collar, and closed with cord and tassels, worn about
1850 over evening dress; also the Inverness overcoat (qv) is sometimes
so called.

=Opera glass=—a binocular telescope of small size for magnifying the
field of view for distant spectators; also the characteristic equipment
of baldheaded front row first nighters.

=Operator=—trade term for machine workmen employed in clothing factories
in contradistinction to journeymen tailors who do work by hand.

=Operette=—proprietary term for an evening dress overcoat, buttoning
high at the throat, lined with white silk or satin in front and there
combining some of the features of a muffler or dress shirt protector.

=Opoponax=—a perfume compounded from a gum resin obtained from a species
of (Persian) parsnip, or in imitation thereof.

=Orarian=—a sort of stole worn by ministers of the Greek and Russian
churches.

=Orarium=—same as Stole (qv).

=Orby=—a single-breasted walking frock coat made without a waist seam,
the fore and back parts being entire; the back made without the usual
sidebody parts, and having but a center seam terminating in a plain open
vent at the waist. (1907.)

=Ordinary=—see Cotton classification.

=Organzine=—(1) warp silk made of two singles (qv) twisted together;
thrown silk; (2) a fabric made of such silk.

=Orris root=—good thing for the linen chest, imparting to the contents
thereof a delicate violet-like fragrance.

=Orthopedic=—name applied to a particular shape of last, generally
broad-toed, in outline as near as possible to that of the natural foot.

=Osnaburg=—(1) coarse cotton shirtings, both plain colored and in small
two-color checks, only slightly finisht after weaving, mostly produced
in the southern states; (2) originally a coarse variety of linen cloth
imported from Osnabruck, Prussia (whence name); used in colonial days
for shirts, breeches, jackets, etc.

=Ostrich feathers=—in men’s wear used for uniform hats, regalia, etc.

=Otter=—an amphibious animal of various species, yielding a pelt
valuable in the manufacture of fur garments; very like seal in texture.

=Ottoman=—a stout, lustrous silk fabric, of heavier cord than faille.

=Ounce=—in the trade the thickness or heaviness of cloths are designated
by the number of ounces in one yard, as 10 oz., 16 oz., 24 oz., etc.

=Out breast=—tailor’s abbreviation for outside breast pocket.

=Out breast pocket=—see Outside b. p.

=Outside breast pocket=—trade term for the regular b. p. of coats and
overcoats, customarily placed on the left side only, and so designated
to distinguish from inside b. p.

=Outer leaf=—see Leaf.

=Out of date=—old-fashioned; old fogeyish.

=Out seam=—see Prix s.

=Outer garments=—broadly, any and all garments except those worn next
the skin; more correctly a suit of clothes, overcoats, capes, and the
like.

=Outer sole=—the s. leather in the bottom of shoe coming next to the
ground.

=Outre=—not conforming to conventional usage or fashion; bizarre;
extravagant; showy; freakish.

=Outing cloth=—a cotton fabric of various uses, woven similarly to
gingham, but of softer, coarser yarns and well napt on both sides; also
called o. flannel, tennis flannel, flannelette, domett, guinea cloth,
etc.

=Outing flannel=—see O. cloth.

=Outing shoe=—a canvas s. for summer wear.

=Outing suit=—a light-weight summer or vacation suit, usually of
flannel.

=Outlet=—in tailoring, an allowance made in cutting up cloth (not shown
on the paper pattern), for seams, vents, the try-on fitting,
alterations, etc.

=Outside back=—tailoring term for the back or outer lining of the back
part of a vest.

=Outside flap=—a sewed-on f. outside of and over the pocket. Compare
In-and-out f.

=Outside shop=—in clothes making a shop, usually not on the
manufacturer’s premises but away or “outside”, where the help is hired
by the contractor, who is practically owner of the shop, altho he may
contract to do no work for any but the one concern. See Inside s.

=Ovalesque=—proprietary name for a dress shirt bosom of unusually large
proportion and of oval shape, claimed not to bulge or break when worn.

=Over-erect=—so straight (sic) as to incline backward.

=Over-shirt=—an outer or top s.; a working s.

=Over-shoulder measure=—in tailoring, a measure taken from front of arm
scye over the shoulder to center of back at the scye depth (qv).

=Oversleeve=—a loose fitting, separate s. of almost any material, worn
by bookkeepers, clerks, et al., to protect shirt or coat sleeves.

=Overalls=—loose fitting over-trousers of duck, denim, etc., for working
wear.

=Overcasting=—see Serging and Whipstitch.

=Overcheck=—a term in weaving for patterns showing one check of
different form or color superimposed upon another.

=Overcoat=—a coat worn over one’s other coat; a top coat; a greatcoat.

=Overcoating=—any fabric woven specially for overcoats, as covert,
kersey, melton, frieze, montagnac, elysian, beaver, vicuna, whipcord,
cheviot, chinchilla, Shetland, etc., (qv).

=Overedge stitch=—an overcasting or selvaging s. performed by machine.

=Overcoats=—(=army=) see Army officer’s o.; (=navy=), see Naval
officer’s o. and Naval o.; (=revenue service=) see Revenue service o.;
(=marine corps=) see Marine corps o.

=Overgaiter=—a close-fitting covering for ankle and leg, spreading out
and embracing the instep, usually of cloth or leather; also called
spatterdash and spats.

=Overgarment=—any outer garment or wrap.

=Overplaid=—a term in weaving indicating a light plaid over a heavier
and smaller underplaid or check, or vice versa; an effect of color
disposition.

=Oversack=—a large, loosely fitting overcoat of the sack or box variety;
an ulster (qv).

=Overseam=—see Round s.

=Overshoe=—a shoe worn over other shoes, usually of rubber, of various
shapes and styles. See also Arctics.

=Overworked edges=—tailoring term for edges held in too much and forced
by the stay tape.

=Own goods=—cloth brought to a tailor, shirtmaker, etc., to be made up.

=Oxford=—see O. mixture, O. shirting, etc.

=Oxford bag=—an article of hand luggage of considerable capacity,
usually with a rounding or sloping top.

=Oxford cap=—see Mortarboard.

=Oxford mixture=—in woolen cloth weaving an effect produced by combining
two threads of black and white or gray into one yarn in the spinning
process, or by blending two shades of raw wool in the carding process,
the finisht effect being a cloth of black or dark steel ground, lightly
sprinkled or mixt with white. In the lighter shadings frequently called
“Cambridge mixture”.

=Oxford shirting=—a soft, plain-woven cotton fabric having loom-produced
checks, stripes, or figures.

=Oxford tie=—a low shoe, laced and tied at the instep, and by extension
any low shoe, as “buttoned oxfords”.


                                   P

=Pack basket=—a b. of splints or rattan covered with canvas, with
shoulder straps; used by hunters, prospectors, et al.

=Pack cloth=—a rectangular length of waterproof canvas useful to
campers, hunters, et al.

=Pack harness=—an arrangement of leather straps for converting hunters,
prospectors, et al., into beasts of burden.

=Pad=—in tailoring a flat, compact cushion or mattress-shaped implement
laid upon the lap-board or any other pressing-board and used in
“pressing-off” and giving form and finish to a garment. Its elasticity
accommodates it to any inequalities of the garment and therefore the
whole surface is reacht by the pressure of the iron and made smoother
and solider than it could be without its use. See Looney.

=Pad=—see Hat p.

=Pad=—(1) to stuff or build up a garment with wadding; (2) to apparently
increase one’s proportions.

=Padded=—given a false physique.

=Padded dress=—an obscene way of emphasizing the d. of trousers once
current among certain Michigan college boys.

=Paddies=—pantalets.

=Padding=—felt, cotton or wool used for giving shape to garments;
wadding.

=Padding stitches=—(tailoring) similar in appearance to zigzag or
herringbone basting s.; in making, the needle may or may not go entirely
thru one of the pieces of goods, according to the nature of the work in
hand; also the s. may be held together in close rows or loosely spaced;
properly made, these s. aid much in shaping of garments.

=Paddock=—according to the best authorities this is a single-breasted
frock overcoat with sewed-on skirts, tho this form is more popularly
known as the “Paletot” (qv), while the “Paddock” is usually shown as a
coat with skirted back and one-piece front with a waistline cut partly
into same, from which underarm V’s extend and give shapeliness. The two
terms are used interchangeably by most American tailors’ journals.

=Padisway=—an old name for peau de soie.

=Page’s livery=—short, tight-fitting jacket with one or three rows of
buttons, closing at the throat with military collar; trousers without
side or back pockets (tho two large watch or waistband pockets are
permissible), corded or piped at side seams to match trimming, if any,
of coat.

=Paisley=—a town in Scotland famous for its textil manufactures and
especially for a fine class of shawls resembling the finest India
shawls; also a name given to the distinctiv “palm” or figure of such
shawls.

=Pajamarite=—proprietary name for a combination sleeping garment
resembling pajamas but made in one piece, with certain features of the
union suit (undergarment) embodied.

=Pajamas=—loose cotton or silk sleeping drawers or trousers, fastened
around the waist with a draw-string; by extension the term now includes
the loose coat or blouse sold with the foregoing. In the East Indies p.
are worn by both sexes, both as sleeping and lounging wear.

=Paletot=—popularly a single-breasted frock overcoat with skirts sewed
on at the waistline, but according to the best authorities a coat with a
skirted back and a one-piece front into which a waistline is partly cut,
extending therefrom being one or two underarm V’s. Compare “Paddock”.

=Pall=—a large square of cloth thrown over a coffin.

=Pall-bearers=—friends complaisantly wearing crepe for a few hours prior
to finally dumping us into the dirt.

=Pallium=—an ecclesiastical vestment of the Roman Catholic church worn
by the pope, patriarchs and archbishops; it is a band of white woolen
webbing, about 3 inches wide, embroidered with black crosses worn around
the neck, and from which two narrow bands of same material depend, one
falling on the breast and the other over the back.

=Palm=—that part of a glove covering the inside of the hand.

=Panache=—variegated.

=Panama hat=—a h. made from the young, unexpanded leaves of the stemless
screwpine (also called jiji japa) specially treated to remove the soft
part of the leaf, soaked in water until pliable, the hats then being
woven by hand in exceedingly moist atmosphere, the very finest h. often
requiring six months to weave.

=Pancake=—the flat cap worn by tars in the grandoldamerican navy.

=Pancake heel=—a h. of imitation sole leather composed of leather
scivings and cement prest to look like sides of sole leather, called
“pancake”.

=Paneled back=—tailoring term for the inside back of a coat made with
broad facings of the coat material around seams and edges, and filled in
with (panels of) silk or other lining.

=Panjam=—see Punjum.

=Pantalet=—a child’s underdrawer.

=Pantaloon trousers=—the same upward as pantaloons but cut straight to
the instep from the calf downward; substantially the same as our modern
trousers (qv); when finisht with loops or buttons at the side (bottom)
they were called Wellingtons, doubtless from having been first worn by
the military. (Early 1900.)

=Pantaloonery=—a little used trade term for fabrics of which pants or
trousers are made. The proper term is “trouserings”.

=Pantaloons=—close-fitting nethergarments reaching midway between the
calf and the ankle, with an opening therein closing with buttons, worn
with gaiters, boots or over the stockings only, during the early part of
the last century.

=Panties=—familiar term for (1) children’s knee pants; (2) children’s
drawers; and more loosely or jocularly (3) men’s ditto.

=Panting=—cloth suitable for trousers. See Trousering.

=Pantorium=—coined name for pressing and cleaning institutions where it
is pretended to care for your clothes, usually at a rate per month.

=Pants=—“gent’s” trousers.

=Pants block=—see Tailor’s b.

=Pants maker=—a journeyman tailor who makes trousers his specialty.

=Paper cloth=—see Xylolin and Wood yarn.

=Paper collar=—a shirt c. made of paper stamped into a resemblance of
linen, formerly used in enormous quantities (the consumption prior to
1883 being estimated at 70,000,000 annually), but now comparativly
unknown.

=Paper garments=—a recent invention. The idea contains the germ of
untold possibilities.

=Paper sole=—derisiv of thin-soled shoes.

=Paper yarn=—a textil y. made of wood cellulose and more properly known
as wood y. (qv). See Xylolin.

=Para rubber=—wild r. from Brazil and Bolivia; the finest commercial
grade.

=Pappoose frame=—an Indian baby cradle and perambulator.

=Paragon frame=—the metal ribs of an umbrella; a proprietary name for
ribs of U shape.

=Paring-off=—in tailoring the process of paring- or trimming off the
surplus cloth along the margin of a garment, when the edges are to be
finisht raw.

=Paring-shears=—tailor’s s. or scissors made expressly for paring the
edges of garments.

=Park coat=—a sort of cutaway frock c., worn for riding exclusively,
fitting snugly at waist and having extra ample skirts.

=Partridge=—a hard, variously markt, striated wood used for walking
sticks.

=Partridge cord=—a name sometimes given to mottled corduroy resembling
in effect the markings of the partridge.

=Paspol=—in tailoring, a cloth-bound edge or piping employed as a finish
to pockets.

=Passe=—faded; old-fashioned; worn out; behind the times.

=Paste=—formerly used to stiffen coats, but not nowadays.

=Patch=—(1) any ornamental bits of court plaster used on the face as
adjuncts to beauty; (2) a mended place in our clothes with reminiscences
of our youth or as a badge of indigence.

=Patch flap=—a pocket f. laid-on outside.

=Patch pocket=—a p. made of the goods of the garment and patcht or sewed
on to the outside thereof, no cutting thru and no lining being required.
Also called patcht p. See also Bellows p.

=Patchouli=—a strong, peculiar oriental perfume, as offensiv to some as
it is pleasing to others; once of considerable popularity amongst ladies
of definit reputation (which reputation still clings to it), which may
account for its masculin popularity.

=Patcht welt pocket=—a p., the slit or opening of which is cut thru a
patcht-on piece of the garment material, which may be of fancy shape,
generally so made for extra strength, as in conductors’ coats. (=Patched
p.=)

=Patent beaver=—a superior quality of beaver cloth with an especially
hard finish and fulled to a degree making it practically waterproof;
similar to Castor b. (qv).

=Patent leather=—name synonymously applied to all so-called “shiny”
leather; that is, upper leathers that have been treated with a coat of
japanning or varnish on one side, giving the leather a very glossy,
black, smooth finish.

=Patent neckband=—general name for shirt n. having a split or pocketed
division in the back so that the back collar button does not touch the
skin of the wearer because of an interposing layer of cloth.

=Patrolmen’s uniform=—see Police u.

=Patten=—a thick-soled overshoe, or one having a device for raising the
foot out of the wet and mud; a clog; a sort of slipper. Term now in
disuse. See Overshoe.

=Pattern paper=—rough-surfaced drafting p. put up in rolls, used by
cutters; usually black, dark green or blue; also manilla.

=Pauldron=—a detachable piece of plate armor for the protection of the
shoulders.

=Pavilion=—the lower pyramid of a diamond. See Brilliant cutting.

=Pea coat=—a seaman’s jacket. See P. jacket.

=Pea jacket=—a short, heavy coat of thick, closely woven cloth, as pilot
cloth, worn in rough weather; a sailor’s j.

=Peacockery=—ostentatious display of fine clothes; affectation in attire
and manner; distressing vanity.

=Peak=—visor.

=Peakt lapel=—having the notch or step cut at an acute angle.

=Pearl=—the beautiful concretion found in the interior of the shells of
many mollusks, resulting in the deposit of nacreous substances around
some nucleus usually of foreign origin; the p. oyster of the Indian seas
yields the most numerous and finest specimens.

=Peascod bellied=—referring to stuft doublets.

=Peau de soie=—a heavy, close-woven, soft finisht, plain colored silk
fabric having minute weftwise ribs, the better grades finisht alike on
both sides, the cheaper face finisht only.

=Peau d’espagne=—a perfume having the characteristics of the scent of
Spanish leather, whence name.

=Pebble goat=—a shoe leather having a surface grain achieved by means of
machinery.

=Peddler=—a peripatetic merchant; a street hawker.

=Pedometer=—a good thing to prove walking lies by.

=Peeler=—general term for long-stapled cotton grown in the Mississippi
valley.

=Peepiehole=—the little opening in front of a boy’s first pants.

=Peg leg=—wooden.

=Peg-top=—trousers cut wide and full around the hips and narrowing
sharply down to the ankle.

=Pegging jack=—a clamp for holding a shoe while it is being pegged.

=Pegging machine=—a m. for nailing (or pegging) soles to the uppers (of
shoes).

=Pekin=—textil designing term for warpwise alternating stripes of
different colors.

=Pelage=—the coat or covering of a fur mammal.

=Pelerine=—a long, narrow cape (now in disuse).

=Pelisse=—(1) a long outergarment or cloak with openings for the arms,
originally of fur or lined with fur; (2) a dragoon’s jacket with shaggy
lining.

=Pelt=—a skin or hide.

=Peltry=—same thing.

=Pen clothes=—see Prison uniform.

=Pen-knife=—originally a pocket k. intended for the making of
quill-pens.

=Penang lawyer=—a cane with a very large round head, common in Penang
and on the Malay peninsula.

=Pencil curl=—hatter’s term for a brim the edge of which is turned over
upon itself, forming a cable-like edge of about the thickness of a
pencil.

=Pencil pocket=—a small, narrow p. for pencil, fountain pen, etc.;
usually a partition of one of the regular breast pockets of a waistcoat.

=Pencil stripe=—in weaving, fine stripes of color on a contrasting
ground; a hairline or slightly coarser.

=Peplum=—loosely, a short skirt to a jacket.

=Pepper-and-salt=—a textil color effect, as of a dark or light ground,
sprinkled or dotted with light or dark specks, properly achieved by
two-color twisted yarns, usually in combinations of black and white.

=Pepperell=—a slightly twilled muslin.

=Per cent=—the fetich of Israel.

=Percale=—a fine, close, plain-woven cotton fabric, similar to cambric,
woven of smooth, round yarns, carefully drest without gloss and usually
printed in shirting patterns, tho also solid white and also in printed
stripes for garment lining, the fabric being slightly sized in this
case; the lower grades not much better than calico.

=Percaline=—a fine, light-weight cotton lining material.

=Perching=—the process of inspecting woolen fabrics as taken from the
loom and removing knots, burs, and other imperfections preparatory to
fulling; holes, if any, being first darned.

=Perching=—a process in leather manufacture following that of knee
staking, the skins being held in a long vise, the operator adjusting the
crutch of a long circular knife against his armpit and pressing hard
against the flesh side of the skin to remove the last vestige of flesh.

=Perfect fit=—something you might be ashamed to be seen in.

=Perfumery=—formerly used to disguise the odors of the unbathed body—and
still so used, of course.

=Periwig=—a formal wig; not such a bundle of vanity as a peruke.

=Perrin’s=—trade diminutiv for the fine French kid gloves manufactured
by Perrin Freres (lately changed to Perrin et Cie), Paris, of world-wide
fame.

=Persian lamb=—the fur of the young black Persian sheep of Southern
Persia, further enhanced in luster by dyeing; one of the most valuable
and best wearing furs. Compare Astrakhan and Broadtail.

=Perspectiv glass=—Briticism for field g.

=Peruke=—a voluminous and prolix wig.

=Perruquier=—wig maker; barber; hair dresser.

=Peter=—slang for watch, especially a repeating watch, as a jeweler
might say to a customer comparing time, “How’s your peter?”

=Peter pan=—a boy’s blouse or shirt; a vogue of the Buster Brown and
Fauntleroy virulence.

=Petersham=—a kind of heavy woolen cloth for overcoats. It has a rough,
knotty surface, and is sometimes called “niggerhead”. A very heavy,
close-felted variety of this cloth is called “cordington”; the finer,
softer kinds, “chinchilla” (qv).

=Petticoat=—originally an undercoat or waistcoat as worn (1400–1600)
under the longer outer coat.

=Petticoat breeches=—wide, flaring knee b. of colonial sailors.

=Petticoat trousers=—a kind of kilt formerly worn by seamen in general
but latterly principally by fishermen. See Galligaskins.

=Phelonion=—a white or reddish vestment similar to the Latin chasuble
(qv) but reaching only to the waist, worn by lectors and readers in the
Greek and Russian churches.

=Photograph case=—usually a leather, folding, screen-like affair for
holding portraits of actresses.

=Phylactery=—a strip or strips of cowhide parchment inscribed with
passages of Scripture and encased in a black calfskin case having thongs
for binding it on the forehead or around the left arm in memory of the
early history of the Jewish race and of one’s duty to observe the law,
or, also, to serve as an amulet.

=Picayune=—a Spanish coin worth 6¼ cents, current during Civil war
times; later applied to the 5-cent piece.

=Piccadilly=—a fashionable residence street in London, whence many names
for articles of masculin attire.

=Piccadilly collar=—a standing shirt c. with points sharply turned back
forming triangles or wings; also called “white wings” and wing c.

=Piccadilly toe=—a name once given to a sharp-pointed t.—but which, like
most shoe names, is now almost forgotten.

=Pick=—(1) the insertion of a thread of weft; (2) the blow which drives
the shuttle thru the warp threads; (3) the speed per minute of a loom;
(4) the number of threads countable within a definit space.

=Picker=—a machine for opening, cleaning and mixing cotton or wool.

=Pickle=—see Tan liquor.

=Picklock=—see Wool.

Picot—an ornamental loopt edging on ribbons, etc.

=Piece dye=—trade term for cloths dyed after weaving or in the piece, as
serges, clays, broadcloths, unfinisht, etc. Compare Skein dyes.

=Piece goods=—woolens and other textil fabrics sold by the bolt or
piece.

=Piece goods trade=—the jobbing trade. Compare Cutting-up trade and
Selling agent.

=Piecing-out=—in tailoring the act of sewing together added or spliced
pieces which are sometimes necessary in facing garments, or in making
the crotch or back-waist part of trousers, is called “piecing them out”;
also “dog-rabbitting”.

=Piffle=—(1) the customer’s expressions of his needs and desires; (2)
the salesman’s arguments in favor of something else.

=Pig-tail=—the common twisted chewing tobacco.

=Pig-tail wig=—a w. with a long tail worn hanging down or tied up with a
bow. Tempus George II.-III.

=Pigeon-toed=—the toes inclining or pointing inwardly.

=Pigskin=—a stout, coarse-grained leather made of hog’s hide.

=Piker=—the smallest thing living; an ostentatious buyer and heavy
canceller; a short-string merchant; a trifler; a kike.

=Pillow=—slang for catcher’s mitten.

=Pillow-case=—a good thing to hit when ausgespielt.

=Pilot cloth=—a heavy, woolen overcoating c., smooth faced, similar to
kersey or beaver, usually dyed navy blue, and intended for marine wear.

=Pimento=—a peculiar and handsome wood grown in Jamaica, possessing a
grain or texture susceptible of a very high polish; much used for
walking sticks.

=Pin=—a little article having many worthier uses than to bend crookedly
for teacher’s chair.

=Pin check=—in weaving, a name given to minute checks or squares,
effected thru colored yarns, resembling pin heads in size.

=Pin rib=—a very delicate rib or cord.

=Pin seal=—trade term for s. leather (qv) having a very fine, close
grain. Compare Cow s.

=Pin tucks=—plaits about one-sixteenth of an inch wide.

=Pinafore=—the sleeveless aprons we wore to keep our dresses clean, at
table and elsewhere, when we were young.

=Pince nez=—eye-glasses held in place by a spring that clamps the nose.

=Pinch collar=—same as meeting folder.

=Pinchbeck=—4 parts copper, 1 of zinc, looks like gold.

=Pine tree=—trade name for a cloth made of long fleece wool, knitted 108
inches wide and by washing in hot water and soap shrunk to 56 inches
wide; mostly used for outdoor clothing in the North.

=Pine