It must not be thought that whilst the missionary opened the minds of
his pupils, he for one day forgot the care of their souls. What avails
human learning without that knowledge which leads to life eternal! Duff
had seen a parable of this in his shipwreck. Eight hundred volumes
which he had carefully chosen were destroyed; so were the papers on the
writing of which he had bestowed weeks and months of pains; "but his
Bible was left to him still!"

So when the flood of death swallows up the fruit of mere earthly
labours, and the sage and the idiot alike are cast on the shore of
eternity bare of all that belonged but to this world, the Word of God
will abide for ever, the Christian's best treasure is left to him still.

The boys of Duff's school were every day taught pure religion, and
their parents were invited to attend during the lesson.

One day that lesson was on Charity as described in the Thirteenth
Chapter of First Corinthians. "Throughout, all were attentive, and
the minds of a few became intensely riveted, while the glistening eye
and the changeful countenance reflected as in a mirror the inward
thought most clearly. At last when the concluding words of the inspired
description of heavenly love was given, 'endureth all things,' a youth
who but a few days before had risen to oppose the reading of the Bible,
started from his seat exclaiming aloud, 'Oh! Sir! That is too good for
us! who can act up to that, who can act up to that.'"

A deep impression was made on the mind of one young Hindu from the
simple reading of the words that promise blessedness to him who loves
and prays for his enemy. For days and weeks the youth could not help
crying out, "'Love your enemies, bless them that curse you!' How
beautiful! how divine! surely this is the truth!"
